# Quantitative Assessment of Early Diabetic Retinopathy Using Fractal Analysis

NING CHEUNG, MBBS1 2 SHUEH-WEN LIM, BMEDSCI14 KIM C. DONAGHUE, MBBS, PHD ALICIA J. JENKINS, MBBS, MD GERALD LIEW, MBBS, MMED3 WYNNE HSU, PHD5 SOPHIE L. ROGERS, MEPI1 MONG LI LEE, PHD6 JIE JIN WANG, PHD1,3 TIEN Y. WONG, MBBS, PHD1,6

# OBJECTIVE

Fractal analysis can quantify the geometric complexity of the retinal vascular branching pattern and may therefore offer a new method to quantify early diabetic microvascular damage. In this study, we examined the relationship between retinal fractal dimension and retinopathy in young individuals with type 1 diabetes.

# RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS

We conducted a cross-sectional study of 729 patients with type 1 diabetes (aged 12–20 years) who had seven-field stereoscopic retinal photographs taken of both eyes. From these photographs, retinopathy was graded according to the modified Airlie House classification, and fractal dimension was quantified using a computer-based program following a standardized protocol.

# RESULTS

In this study, 137 patients (18.8%) had diabetic retinopathy signs; of these, 105 had mild retinopathy. Median (interquartile range) retinal fractal dimension was 1.46214 (1.45023–1.47217). After adjustment for age, sex, diabetes duration, A1C, blood pressure, and total cholesterol, increasing retinal vascular fractal dimension was significantly associated with increasing odds of retinopathy (odds ratio 3.92 [95% CI 2.02–7.61] for fourth versus first quartile of fractal dimension). In multivariate analysis, each 0.01 increase in retinal vascular fractal dimension was associated with a nearly 40% increased odds of retinopathy (1.37 [1.21–1.56]). This association remained after additional adjustment for retinal vascular caliber.

# CONCLUSIONS

Greater retinal fractal dimension, representing increased geometric complexity of the retinal vasculature, is independently associated with early diabetic retinopathy signs in type 1 diabetes. Fractal analysis of fundus photographs may allow quantitative measurement of early diabetic microvascular damage.

Recent studies support the value of computer-based imaging analysis of fundus photographs to study vascular complications of diabetes (1). For example, changes in retinal vascular caliber have been associated with increased risk of diabetes and may predict the onset of diabetic microvascular and macrovascular complications (1–6). However, previous studies have largely focused on the caliber of retinal vessels, which represents only one of the many aspects of the retinal vascular geometry. Other structural parameters of the retinal vasculature (e.g., branching angle, vascular tortuosity) are now being explored (7,8). Although all these measures may individually convey some information regarding specific aspects of the retinal vascular network, there is a lack of a single “global” measure that can summarize the branching pattern of the retinal vasculature.

# RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS

This was a cross-sectional study of children and adolescents, aged 12–20 years old, with type 1 diabetes who were managed at the Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia. Detailed characteristics of the study population have been reported previously (16–18). In brief, all type 1 diabetic patients, aged between 12 and 20 years, attending the Diabetes Complications Assessment clinic at the Children’s Hospital at Westmead were invited to participate in this study. The definition of type 1 diabetes was based on criteria for registration in the Australasian Pediatric Endocrine Group Diabetes Register and national guidelines. Of the 810 participants who had retinal photographs taken between 1990 and 2002, we excluded those with photographs of insufficient quality for retinopathy assessment (n = 1) or fractal analysis (n = 80) (mostly due to media opacity or image defocus), leaving 729 (90.0%) participants for this analysis.

Corresponding author: Dr. Ning Cheung, dannycheung@hotmail.com.

Received 4 July 2008 and accepted 23 September 2008. Published ahead of print at http://care.diabetesjournals.org on 3 October 2008. DOI: 10.2337/dc08-1233.

© 2009 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the work is not altered. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/ for details.

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

# Cheung and Associates

# Table 1—Participant characteristics by retinal vascular fractal dimension quartiles

|Characteristics|All|First quartile:|Second quartile:|Third quartile:|Fourth quartile:|P value|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|n|729|182|182|182|183| |
|Sex (% male)|44.2|40.7|45.6|48.9|41.5|0.722|
|Age (years)|13.6 (12.8–15.0)|13.6 (12.8–14.9)|13.6 (12.8–15.0)|13.7 (12.9–15.0)|13.7 (12.8–15.1)|0.724|
|Diabetes duration (years)|5.3 (3.4–8.1)|4.6 (3.2–7.3)|5.2 (3.3–8.0)|5.4 (3.6–8.0)|5.8 (3.5–8.6)|0.016|
|BMI (kg/m²)|21.2 (19.3–23.6)|21.0 (19.3–23.8)|21.5 (19.3–23.7)|21.5 (19.4–23.7)|20.9 (19.1–23.4)|0.907|
|Systolic blood pressure, age- and sex-adjusted percentile|68 (46–85)|68 (52–85)|64 (50–85)|70 (42–85)|69 (43–85)|0.615|
|Diastolic blood pressure, age- and sex-adjusted percentile|72 (50–83)|67 (47–83)|71 (50–82)|72.5 (52–83.5)|74 (50–84)|0.241|
|A1C (%)|8.4 (7.7–9.3)|8.4 (7.7–9.4)|8.2 (7.7–9.2)|8.8 (7.8–9.6)|8.4 (7.7–9.1)|0.673|
|Total cholesterol (mmol/l)|4.3 (3.8–4.8)|4.3 (3.8–4.8)|4.3 (3.8–4.8)|4.2 (3.6–4.8)|4.3 (3.9–4.8)|0.877|

Data are median (interquartile range) or proportion, as appropriate. P values relate to trend across quartiles, assessed by Kendall’s rank correlation test or Cuzick nonparametric test for trend.

The characteristics of the included and excluded participants (e.g., age, diabetes duration, glycemia, and blood pressure) were similar (data not shown).

# Retinal photography and retinopathy assessment

Retinal photography was performed according to a standardized protocol, as detailed elsewhere. Brieﬂy, Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study seven-standard field stereoscopic retinal photographs were taken of both eyes after pupil dilation. Diabetic retinopathy was graded from these photographs by an ophthalmologist who was masked to participants’ characteristics, according to the ETDRS adaptation of the modified Airlie House classification. Retinopathy was defined as ETDRS level 21 (minimal nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy) or greater. The overall agreement, based on 30% of photographs graded independently by another ophthalmologist also masked to subject characteristics, was high (weighted kappa = 0.80).

# Fractal analysis of retinal photographs

Fractal analysis was performed from ETDRS field 1 (centered on the optic disc) fundus photographs using a new computer-based program (International Retinal Imaging Software [IRIS-Fractal]) based on a standardized protocol. For each retinal photograph, a trained grader, masked to participants’ characteristics, used the program to measure fractal dimension of the retinal vasculature within a predefined circular region of 3.5 optic disc radii centered on the optic disc. After IRIS-Fractal automatically traced all of the retinal vessels within this region, the grader checked the tracing with the original photograph and removed occasional artifacts misidentified as vessels (peripapillary atrophy, choroidal vessels, pigment abnormalities, and nerve fiber reflection). The program then performed fractal analysis and calculated fractal dimension using the box-counting approach, an established method used to quantify fractal dimension for structures that are not perfectly self-similar, such as the real-life retinal vasculature. Reproducibility of measurements by IRIS-Fractal was high, with intra- and intergrader intraclass correlation coefficients ranging from 0.93 to 0.95.

# Statistical analysis

We used logistic regression to determine the odds ratio (OR) for retinopathy in relation to variations in fractal dimension, initially adjusting for age and sex, and additionally for diabetes duration, A1C, MABP, BMI, and total cholesterol levels. In supplementary analysis, we further adjusted for retinal arteriolar or venular calibers, which have been associated with diabetic retinopathy in previous studies. The average fractal dimension of both eyes (or the right eye if the left eye photograph was ungradable or the left eye if the right eye photograph was ungradable) was used. Retinopathy status was determined using data from both eyes when available. In models in which retinal vascular caliber measurements were included for multivariate analyses, right eye caliber measurements were used (or the left eye if the right eye calibers were ungradable). Eye-specific analyses were also performed using retinopathy and fractal dimension data from the left eyes and then repeated using data from the right eyes to assess the internal consistency of our findings. Finally, analysis using the raw (i.e., without any manual refinement) retinal fractal dimension data was done to exclude any bias from the manual part of fractal grading in our study. All analyses were performed Stata (intercooled version 9.2 for Windows; StataCorp, College Station, TX).

# RESULTS

The characteristics of our study population by fractal dimension quartiles are shown in Table 1. In our population, 137 (18.8%) participants had retinopathy in at least one eye. Among these participants, 105 had mild (ETDRS level 21–30) retinopathy and 32 had moderate (ETDRS level 31–41) retinopathy.

# Fractal dimension and retinopathy

|Retinal fractal dimension|N total|Prevalence*|Age and sex adjusted†|P value|adjusted‡|P value|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Per 0.01 increase|729|—|1.33 (1.19–1.49)|0.001|1.37 (1.21–1.56)|0.001|
|Quartile 1: 1.45023|182|16 (8.8)|1.0|—|1.0|—|
|Quartile 2: 1.45023–1.46207|182|31 (17.0)|2.16 (1.13–4.12)|0.020|2.07 (1.03–4.18)|0.041|
|Quartile 3: 1.46214–1.47215|182|39 (21.4)|2.94 (1.57–5.52)|0.001|3.01 (1.53–5.94)|0.001|
|Quartile 4: $1.47217|183|51 (27.9)|4.07 (2.21–7.49)|0.001|3.92 (2.02–7.61)|0.001|
|Ptrend|0.001|0.001|0.001|0.001|0.001|0.001|

Data are n (%) or OR (95% CI). *Prevalence of diabetic retinopathy in either eye. †OR (95% CI) of prevalent diabetic retinopathy (any grade compared with none in either eye) adjusted for age (continuous per 1 year increase) and sex. ‡OR (95% CI) adjusted for age (continuous per 1 year increase), sex, diabetes duration (continuous-per 1 year increase), A1C (continuous per 1 mmol/l increase), MABP (continuous per 1 mmHg), BMI (continuous per 1 kg/m² increase), and total cholesterol (continuous per 1 mmol/l increase).

Fractal dimension was not normally distributed; the average fractal dimension was higher in participants with retinopathy than in those without retinopathy (median 1.46798 [interquartile range 1.45861–1.47626] compared with 1.46068 [1.44835–1.47062], respectively; P 0.001).

Table 2 shows that after adjustments for age and sex, greater fractal dimension was significantly associated with increased odds of retinopathy (odds ratio [OR] 4.04 [95%CI 2.21–7.49] comparing highest to lowest quartile of fractal dimension; OR 1.33 for each 0.01 increase in fractal dimension). This association remained with additional adjustments for diabetes duration, A1C, MABP, BMI, and total cholesterol levels.

Further adjustment for retinal arteriolar or venular caliber had minimal impact on the association (OR 3.92 [95% CI 1.98 –7.75] comparing highest to lowest quartile of fractal dimension with additional adjustment for arteriolar and venular caliber, 3.93 [1.99 –7.76] with additional adjustment for arteriolar caliber, and 3.77 [1.94 –7.34] with additional adjustment for venular caliber). In supplementary analyses, the pattern of association was similar with the use of eye-specific data (supplemental Table 1 available in an online appendix at http://dx.doi.org/10.2337/dc08-1233) or raw (i.e., without any manual refinement) retinal fractal dimension data (supplemental Table 2).

CONCLUSIONS — The retinal vascular tree is a complex branching structure that cannot be sufficiently described using the classical Euclidian geometric terms. Fractals, on the other hand, represent a type of non-Euclidian geometric shape that has been applied in many aspects of medicine to describe similarly complex branching biological structures (e.g., coronary arterioles or pulmonary bronchi). Fractals can be defined as geometric patterns whose parts resemble the whole (i.e., the property of self-similarity), and fractal dimension is a measure of the geometric complexity of a spatial object. The retinal vascular tree is a fractal object. Fractal analysis of the retinal vasculature has been performed in previous studies that provided insights into the embryology and development of retinal vessels. In this study, we found that increased fractal dimension of the retinal vasculature, reflecting increased geometric complexity of the retinal vascular branching pattern, is associated with early retinopathy signs in young individuals with type 1 diabetes.

This association was strong, graded, and independent of conventional retinopathy risk factors (e.g., diabetes duration or A1C). Most of the previous studies on the relationship of structural retinal vascular changes and diabetic retinopathy focused on the assessment of retinal vascular caliber, which represents only one of many parameters of the retinal vascular geometry. Retinal vascular caliber does not convey information regarding the complexity of the retinal vascular branching pattern. Fractal dimension, on the other hand, is a “global” measure of the overall geometric complexity of the retinal vascular network. Our study suggests that fractal analysis of fundus photographs may allow quantitative measurement of early diabetic microvascular damage.

Although there have been previous attempts to study fractal dimension of the retinal vasculature, only a few small studies examined the relationship of fractal dimension and retinopathy, and most of these studies used imprecise methods to quantify fractals. Clearly, additional studies are needed to verify our hypotheses.

# Cheung and Associates

Our study has potential clinical implications. Young patients with type 1 diabetes all have a significant lifetime risk of blindness from diabetic retinopathy, and there is a need to improve the identification and monitoring of this sight-threatening eye disease throughout the lives of these patients. This remains clinically challenging because of, at least in part, the limited number of specific risk factors for retinopathy in young diabetic patients. As shown in our study, increased retinal vascular fractal dimension may represent a novel and specific biomarker for the presence of early diabetic retinopathy, even after factoring in the effects of traditional retinopathy risk factors (e.g., diabetes duration or A1C). Thus, computer-based fractal analysis of retinal images may offer a new means to quantitatively assess the risk of diabetic retinopathy and may provide additional information regarding the risk of other diabetes microvascular complications. Additional studies, including prospective studies, are needed to elucidate the role of fractal analysis in the clinical assessment and prediction of major outcomes of diabetic patients.

Strengths of our study include a large sample of young patients with type 1 diabetes, quantitative evaluation of fractal dimension, standardized assessment of diabetic retinopathy using stereoscopic seven-field retinal photographs, and detailed assessment of potential confounding variables (e.g., diabetes duration, A1C, and retinal vascular caliber). Limitations should also be noted. First, the cross-sectional design of the study did not allow us to ascertain whether the greater fractal dimension is antecedent or consequential to diabetic retinopathy. Additional studies, which are currently underway, are needed to determine the temporal sequence of the observed association. Second, there are several potential sources of error in fractal dimension measurement, as described previously. In particular, falsely high fractal dimension might result from the inclusion of nonvascular artifacts or large retinopathy lesions. However, most of these artifacts would have been eliminated through manual inspection by our grader. Only 4 of the 137 patients with retinopathy in our study had retinopathy signs in ETDRS field 1 photographs in which fractal dimension was measured. All of these lesions were of small size (dot hemorrhage or microaneurysms) and were not traced by the program. Exclusion of these four participants from our analysis did not alter our results (data not shown).

# References

1. Nguyen TT, Wang JJ, Sharrett AR, Amirul Islam F, Klein R, Klein BE, Cotch MF, Wong TY: The relationship of retinal vascular caliber with diabetes and retinopathy: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Diabetes Care 31:544–549, 2008
2. Klein R, Klein BE, Moss SE, Wong TY: Retinal vessel caliber and microvascular and macrovascular disease in type 2 diabetes. XXI. The Wisconsin Epidemiologic Study of Diabetic Retinopathy. Ophthalmology 114:1884–1892, 2007
3. Cheung N, Wong TY: Diabetic retinopathy and systemic vascular complications. Prog Retin Eye Res 27:161–176, 2008
4. Patton N, Aslam TM, MacGillivray T, Deary IJ, Dhillon B, Eikelboom RH, Yogesan K, Constable IJ: Retinal image analysis: concepts, applications and potential. Prog Retin Eye Res 25:99–127, 2006
5. Witt N, Wong TY, Hughes AD, Chaturvedi N, Klein BE, Evans R, McNamara M, Thom SA, Klein R: Abnormalities of retinal microvascular structure and risk of mortality from ischemic heart disease and stroke. Hypertension 47:975–981, 2006
6. Fractals and medicine. Lancet 338:1425–1426, 1991
7. Maguire A, Chan A, Cusumano J, Hing S, Craig M, Silink M, Howard N, Donaghue K: The case for biennial retinopathy screening in children and adolescents. Diabetes Care 28:509–513, 2005
8. Liew G, Wang JJ, Cheung N, Zhang YP, Hsu W, Lee ML, Mitchell P, Tikellis G, Taylor B, Wong TY: The retinal vasculature as a fractal: methodology, reliability and relationship to blood pressure. Ophthalmology. 7 August 2008 [Epub ahead of print]
9. Masters BR: Fractal analysis of the vascular tree in the human retina. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 6:427–452, 2004
10. Stosic T, Stosic BD: Multifractal analysis of human retinal vessels. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 25:1101–1107, 2006
11. McKay TL, Gedeon DJ, Vickerman MB, Hylton AG, Ribita D, Olar HH, Kaiser PK, Parsons-Wingerter P: Selective inhibition of angiogenesis in small blood vessels and decrease in vessel diameter throughout the vascular tree by triamcinolone acetonide. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 49:1184–1190, 2008

Acknowledgments— This study was supported by National Health and Medical Research Council Grant 475605 (to T.Y.W., K.C.D., A.J.J.), a Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Innovative Grant (to T.Y.W., K.C.D., A.J.J., N.C.), and a Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital Research Grant (to N.C.). No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Parts of this study were presented as a poster at the World Ophthalmology Congress, Hong Kong, 28 June–2 July 2008.

# Fractal dimension and retinopathy

AK, Hing S, Lee JW, Silink M, Howard NJ, Donaghue KC: Discordant trends in microvascular complications in adolescents with type 1 diabetes from 1990 to 2002. *Diabetes Care* 28:1974 –1980, 2005

18. Donaghue KC, Fung AT, Hing S, Fairchild J, King J, Chan A, Howard NJ, Silink M: The effect of prepubertal diabetes duration on diabetes: microvascular complications in early and late adolescence. *Diabetes Care* 20:77– 80, 1997

19. Wong TY, Knudtson MD, Klein R, Klein BE, Meuer SM, Hubbard LD: Computer-assisted measurement of retinal vessel diameters in the Beaver Dam Eye Study: methodology, correlation between eyes, and effect of refractive errors. *Ophthalmology* 111:1183–1190, 2004

20. Hubbard LD, Brothers RJ, King WN, Clegg LX, Klein R, Cooper LS, Sharrett AR, Davis MD, Cai J: Methods for evaluation of retinal microvascular abnormalities associated with hypertension/sclerosis in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study. *Ophthalmology* 106: 2269 –2280, 1999

21. Cheung N, Islam FM, Saw SM, Shankar A, de Haseth K, Mitchell P, Wong TY: Distribution and associations of retinal vascular caliber with ethnicity, gender, and birth parameters in young children. *Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci* 48:1018 – 1024, 2007

22. Daxer A: The fractal geometry of proliferative diabetic retinopathy: implications for the diagnosis and the process of retinal vasculogenesis. *Curr Eye Res* 12:1103–1109, 1993

23. Daxer A: Characterisation of the neovascularisation process in diabetic retinopathy by means of fractal geometry: diagnostic implications. *Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol* 231:681– 686, 1993

24. Daxer A: Mechanisms in retinal vasculogenesis: an analysis of the spatial branching site correlation. *Curr Eye Res* 14:251–254, 1995

110 DIABETES CARE, VOLUME32, NUMBER 1, JANUARY 2009

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/32/1/106/600156/zdc00109000106.pdf by guest on 10 March 2025

