# Integrated Feature Selection and Higher-order Spatial Feature Extraction for Object Categorization

David Liu¹, Gang Hua², Paul Viola², Tsuhan Chen¹

Dept. of ECE, Carnegie Mellon University¹ and Microsoft Live Labs²

dliu@cmu.edu, {ganghua,viola}@microsoft.com, tsuhan@cmu.edu

# Abstract

In computer vision, the bag-of-visual words image representation has been shown to yield good results. Recent work has shown that modeling the spatial relationship between visual words further improves performance. Previous work extracts higher-order spatial features exhaustively. However, these spatial features are expensive to compute. We propose a novel method that simultaneously performs feature selection and feature extraction. Higher-order spatial features are progressively extracted based on selected lower order ones, thereby avoiding exhaustive computation. The method can be based on any additive feature selection algorithm such as boosting. Experimental results show that the method is computationally much more efficient than previous approaches, without sacrificing accuracy.

# 1. Introduction

The traditional pipeline of pattern recognition systems consists of three stages: feature extraction, feature selection, and classification. These stages are normally conducted in independent steps, lacking an integrated approach. The issues are as follows: 1. Speed: Feature extraction can be time consuming. Features that require extensive computation should be generated only when needed. 2. Storage: Extracting all features before selecting them can be cumbersome when they don’t fit into the random access memory.

Many object recognition problems involve a prohibitively large number of features. It is not uncommon that computing the features is the bottleneck of the whole pipeline. Techniques such as “classifier cascade” [17] reduce the amount of computation for feature extraction in run time (in testing), while the aim here is to improve the feature extraction and selection procedure in training.

In this work, we focus on the bag-of-local feature descriptors image representation [3] and its recent extensions [15][10][18]. Local feature descriptors are image statistics extracted from pixel neighborhoods or patches. Recent work of [15][10][18] focused on modeling the spatial relationship between pixels or patches. We call the features originated from local feature descriptors as 1st order features, and features that encode spatial relationship between a set of two, three, or N patches as 2nd, 3rd, or Nth order features, respectively. Features with order larger than one are called higher-order features. These are analogous to N-grams [2] used in statistical language modeling. It is worth mentioning that, by higher-order features, we do not mean algebraic expansions (monomials) of lower order ones.

such as cross terms (x1x2), squares or cubes (x3).

In the recent works of [15][10][18], higher-order features are extracted exhaustively. However, these higher-order features are prohibitively expensive to compute: first, their number is combinatorially exploding with the number of pixels or patches; second, extracting them requires expensive nearest neighbor or distance computations in image space [4]. It is the expensive nature of higher-order features that motivates our work.

Instead of exhaustively extracting all higher-order features before feature selection begins, we propose to extract them progressively during feature selection, as illustrated in Fig. 1. We start the feature selection process as early as when the feature pool consists only of 1st order features. Subsequently, features that have been selected are used to create higher-order features. This process dynamically enlarges the feature pool in a greedy fashion so that we don’t need to exhaustively compute and store all higher-order features.

A comprehensive review of feature selection methods is given by [8]. Our method can be based on any additive feature selection algorithm such as boosting [20] or CMIM [7][16]. Boosting was originally proposed as a classifier and has also been used as a feature selection method [17] due to its good performance, simplicity in implementation, and ease of extension to multiclass problems [20]. Another popular branch of feature selection methods is based on information-theoretic criteria such as maximization of conditional mutual information [7][16].

# 2. Integrated feature selection and extraction

Each image is represented as a feature vector which dynamically increases in the number of dimensions. Initially, each feature corresponds to a distinct codeword. The feature values are the normalized histogram bin counts of the visual words. These features are the 1st order features, and this is the bag-of-visual words image representation [3]. Visual words, with textons [9] as a special case, have been used in various applications. A dictionary of codewords refers to the clusters of local feature descriptors extracted from pixel neighborhoods or patches, and a visual word refers to an instance of a codeword.

Our method maintains a ‘feature pool’ which initially consists only of 1st order features. Subsequently, instead of exhaustively building all higher-order features, the process of feature selection and higher-order feature extraction are run alternately. At each round, feature selection picks a feature, and feature extraction pairs this feature with each of the previously selected features.

Figure 2. The ‘feature pool’ is dynamically built by alternating between feature selection and feature extraction.

pairs this feature with each of the previously selected features. The pairing process can be generic, and we will explain the implementation in Sec. 3. The pairing process creates new features which are concatenated to the feature vector of each image. In the next round of feature selection, this enlarged ‘feature pool’ provides the features to be selected from.

In Fig. 2, we illustrate this process for the first few rounds. In the first round, feature selection picks a feature (the light gray squares) from the ‘feature pool’ and puts it in a 1st order list (not shown in Fig. 2) that holds all previous selected 1st order features. Since the list was empty, we continue to the second round. In the second round, feature selection picks a feature (the dark gray squares) from the ‘feature pool’ and places it in the 1st order list. At the same time, feature extraction pairs this newly selected feature with the previously selected feature (the light gray square) and creates new features (the diagonally patterned squares). These 2nd order features are then augmented into the ‘feature pool’. In general, we may maintain 1st, ..., Lth-order lists instead of only 1st order lists. If a selected feature has order L1, then it was originated from L1 codewords, and pairing it with another feature of order L2 means that we can create new features that originate from a set of L1 + L2 codewords.

In Algorithm 1 we detail the procedure of computing features up to the 2nd order. We use Discrete AdaBoost with decision stumps for feature selection as in [17], although other feature selection methods could be used as well. AdaBoost maintains a set of sample weights, {vn}, n = 1, ..., N, on the N training images (Line 1). At each round, a decision stump tries to minimize the weighted error rate by picking an optimal feature and threshold (Line 4). The selected feature could be a 1st or 2nd order feature. If it is a 1st order feature, it is placed in the 1st-order list z(.) (Line 8), and then paired with all previous members in the 1st-order list to generate new 2nd order features (Line 11). The new

# 1. First-order and Second-order Features

|Sky|1st order|2nd order|
|---|---|---|
|Grass|1st order|2nd order|
|Cow|1st order|2nd order|
|Building|1st order|2nd order|

Number of features

Figure 3. The order (1st vs 2nd) of a selected feature in each round.

# Algorithm 1: Integrated-Feature-Selection-And-Spatial-Feature-Extraction

1. Sample weights v(1) ← 1/N, n = 1, ..., N.
2. k ← 0.
3. for m=1,...,M do
4. Fit decision stump ym(x) to training data by minimizing weighted error function
5. Denote feature index selected by decision stump as i(m)
6. if i(m) corresponds to a 1st order feature then
7. k ← k + 1
8. z(k) ← i(m)
9. for j=1,...,k-1 do
10. for each image do
11. BuildSecondOrderFeatures(z(k), z(j))
12. end
13. Augment feature pool
14. end
15. end
16. Selected features are {xi(1), ...,xi(M)} for any vector x
17. v(m+1) ← v(m) exp {αn I(yn(xn))}

We will experiment with the last two methods later.

# 3. Second-order spatial features

The algorithm introduced in the previous section is a generic method for integrating the feature selection and feature extraction processes. In this section we provide examples of building 2nd order features, given a pair of 1st order features, (wa, wb).

Different kinds of spatial histograms can be used for building 2nd order features. In Fig. 4(a), we illustrate a spatial histogram with distance approximately in log.

# Figure 4. Examples of spatial histograms.

These are best viewed in color. Descriptors, since the reference center is always in respect to the center word wa, and describes the relative position of instances of wb. The descriptors can also be (quasi-)scale invariant. This can be achieved by determining the normalized distance between instances of wa and wb, where the normalization is done by considering the geometric mean of the scale of the two patches. To make the descriptor in Fig. 4(a) rotation invariant, we can take into account the dominant orientation of a patch [19]. However, rotation invariance may diminish discriminative power and hurt performance [19] in object categorization.

Scale, similar to the shape context histogram [1]. The log scale tolerates larger uncertainties of bin counts in longer ranges. The four directional bins are constructed to describe the semantics ‘above’, ‘below’, ‘to the left’, and ‘to the right’. In Fig. 4(b), directions are ignored in order to describe how the co-occurrence of (wa, wb) varies in distance. In [15], squared regions are used to approximate the circular regions in Fig. 4(b) in order to take advantage of the integral histogram method [14]. Of course, squared regions and integral histogram can be used in our work as well.

# Algorithm 2: BuildSecondOrderFeatures

1. Goal: create feature descriptor given a word pair
2. Input: codeword pair (wa, wb)
3. Output: a vector of bin counts
4. Suppose there are Na instances of wa, and Nb instances of wb in the image
5. Initialize Na spatial histograms, using each instance of wa as a reference center
6. for i=1,...,Na do
7. Count the number of instances of wb falling in each bin
8. end
9. Sum up corresponding bins over the Na spatial histograms
10. Divide bin counts by Na

In Fig. 5, red circles indicate words used as reference center. The red-green pairs correspond to a highly discriminative 2nd order feature that has been selected in early rounds of boosting. The images are those that are incorrectly classified when only 1st order features are used for training a classifier. We can see that 2nd order features can detect meaningful patterns in these images. As a result, most of these images are correctly classified.

# 4. Experiments

We use three datasets in the experiments: the PASCAL VOC2006 dataset [5], the Caltech-4 plus background dataset used in [6], and the MSRC-v2 15-class dataset used in [15]. We used the same training-testing experiment setups as in these respective references.

For each dataset we use different local feature descriptors to show the generality of our approach. For the PASCAL and Caltech datasets, we adopt the popular choice of finding a set of salient image regions using the Harris-Laplace interest point detectors [5]. Another scheme is to abandon the use of interest point detectors [13] and sample image patches uniformly from the image. We adopt this approach for the Caltech-4 dataset. Each region or patch is then converted into a 128-D SIFT [12] descriptor. For the MSRC dataset, we follow the common approach [15] of computing dense filter-bank (3 Gaussians, 4 Laplacian of Gaussians, 4 first order derivatives of Gaussians) responses for each pixel.

# 4.1. Integrated vs Separated

Here we present the main result of this paper. In Fig. 6 we show the experiment on the 15-class MSRC dataset. We use a multiclass version of AdaBoost [20] for feature selection, and linear SVM for classification.

|Accuracy|Accuracy|Elapsed time (sec)|Elapsed time (sec)|
|---|---|
|Number of features|Proposed|Baseline|Proposed|
|0.6|500|1000|1500|
|0.5|2000|0|500|
|0.4|1000|1500|2000|
|0.3|0|1000|2000|
|0.2|0|0|0|
|0.1|0|0|0|

Figure 6. Integrated vs separated: After around 800 rounds of boosting, the proposed method outperforms baseline both in (a) testing accuracy and (b) required training time.

as explained in Sec. 2. In Fig. 6(a), we see that the accuracy settles down after about 800 rounds of boosting. Accuracy is calculated as the mean over the diagonal elements of the 15-class confusion matrix. In Fig. 6(b), we see the integrated feature selection and extraction scheme requires only about 33% of training time compared to the canonical approach where feature extraction and selection are two separate processes.

Surprisingly, we can see in Fig. 6(a) that, in addition to being more efficient, the proposed scheme also achieves better accuracy in spite of its greedy nature. This can be explained by the fact that 2nd order features are sparser than 1st order features and hence statistically less reliable; the integrated scheme starts with the pool of first order features and gradually adds in 2nd order features, hence it spends more quality time with more reliable 1st order features.

In Fig. 6(c)-(e) we examine some temporal behaviors of the two methods. In Fig. 6(c), we show the cumulative number of 2nd order features being extracted at each round of feature selection. While the canonical procedure extracts all features before selection starts, the proposed scheme aggressively extracts 2nd order features in earlier rounds and then slows down. This logarithmic type of curve signifies the coupling between the feature extraction and the feature selection processes; if they weren’t coupled, features would have been extracted at a constant (linear) speed instead of a logarithmic.

In Fig. 6(c), we also noticed that at 800 rounds of boosting, only about half of all possible 2nd order features were extracted. This implies less computation in terms of feature extraction, as well as more efficient feature selection, as the feature pool is much smaller.

In Fig. 6(d), it appears that the canonical approach selects 2nd order features at roughly the same pace as the integrated scheme, both selecting on average 0.7 second-order features per round of boosting. But in fact, as shown in Fig. 6(e), the overlap between the selected features of the two methods is small; at 800 rounds of boosting, the share ratio is only 0.14. The share ratio is the intersection of the shared visual words and visual word pairs of the two methods divided by the union. This means that the two methods have very different temporal behaviors.

# 4.2. Importance of feature selection

Here we compare with the recent work of [15], where feature selection is not performed, but first and second-order features are quantized separately into dictionaries of codewords. A histogram of these codewords is used as a feature vector. In Table 1, all three methods use the nearest neighbor classifier as in [15] for fair comparison. We see that our method yields state-of-the-art performance, compared to the quantized (Method 2) and non-quantized (Method 1) versions. In addition, since the 2nd order features need not be exhaustively computed and also no vector quantization on 2nd order features is required, our method is also much faster than the method in [15].

| |Proposed|Method 1|Method 2 [15]|
|---|---|---|---|
|Feature selection|√|×| |
|Quantization|×| |√|
|Accuracy|75.9%|71.3%|74.1%|

Table 1. Importance of feature selection.

# 4.3. Linear SVM on weighted decision stumps

As explained in Sec. 2, we propose to concatenate the weighted output of all weak classifiers, {α1y1(x), ..., αMyM(x)}, from AdaBoost as a feature vector and then run a linear SVM. Results are shown in Table 2. The superior result over AdaBoost comes from a re-weighting of the terms {α1y1(x), ..., αMyM(x)}.

| |PASCAL|MSRC|
|---|---|---|
|(EER)|(1-accuracy)| |
|AdaBoost classifier (1st order feat)|13.4%|24.1%|
|AdaBoost classifier (1st & 2nd order)|12.1%|21.2%|
|Linear SVM on weighted decision stumps|10.9%|16.9%|

Table 2. Performance on the PASCAL car-vs-rest and MSRC 15-class datasets. The best results [5] reported on the PASCAL VOC2006 and VOC2007 datasets employ the Spatial Pyramid [11] technique on top of the bag of words representation. The Spatial Pyramid technique is orthogonal to the proposed method and combining them is expected to yield even better results.

# 4.4. Increasing the order

In Fig. 7, we experiment on the MSRC dataset and see that the classification accuracy obtained from using a feature pool of 1st and 2nd order features is higher than using 1st order features alone. Including 3rd order features does not improve accuracy. We generated 3rd order features by counting the number of times three codewords (wa, wb, wc) fall within a radius of 30 pixels, i.e., the spatial histogram has only one bin.

1 We re-implemented the work of [15], because they used an untypical quantization scheme to generate 1st order codewords, and results are not comparable; also, their spatial histogram is square-shaped.

order features are generated every time a 1st order feature is selected (which corresponds to wa) and paired with each of the previously selected 2nd order features (recall that a 2nd order feature comes from a word pair, (wb, wc)), or vice versa. The reason for reducing the number of bins to one is to account for the data sparseness of higher-order features, which we will discuss later.

Recall that spatial histograms collect spatial co-occurrence of word pairs; in this case the specific word pair corresponds to a person’s nose and eye from real data. Ideally the two histograms would be nearly identical, but image variations and clustering artifacts prevent it from being so. In Fig. 8(b), using the top-N technique, the two histograms become more similar to each other. The reason that 2nd order features benefit more from this technique than 1st order ones is due to the sparsity of co-occurrence of a word pair. The chance of co-occurrence between a pair of visual words within a specific spatial bin is at the order of approximately 1/(J2×12), where J is the size of the dictionary of codewords. Compared to the order of 1/J for the histogram of visual words, slight image variations and clustering artifacts can result in larger disturbances in the spatial feature bin counts than in the visual word bin counts. The top-N technique increases the bin counts (before normalization) and reduces the sensitivity to variations. In Fig. 9 we see the population of a particular codeword getting denser as c2 increases. In Fig. 9(i)(ii), this codeword rarely appears ‘correctly’ on the chin of the face. Increasing c2 increases its occurrence on the chin, but also increases its occurrence at other locations, so increasing c2 indefinitely would lead to performance degrading. Overall, this suggests that using a small value of c1 but a moderate value of c2 should give the best result. Indeed, using AdaBoost as classifier, we found that (c1 = 1, c2 = 10) gives state-of-the-art performance, as shown in Table 3.

|(c,c)|(1,1) (4,4) (10,10) (1,10)|(1,1) (4,4) (10,10) (1,10)|(1,1) (4,4) (10,10) (1,10)|(1,1) (4,4) (10,10) (1,10)|
|---|---|
|Class|Face|Motorbike|Airplane|Car|
|1st order feat|4.15|1.50|2.75|1.00|
|1st and 2nd order feat|1.84|1.50|2.25|0.50|
|1st order feat|3.23|2.00|4.00|1.50|
|1st and 2nd order feat|0.92|1.00|2.00|1.00|
|1st order feat|5.53|2.75|4.00|2.25|
|1st and 2nd order feat|0.92|1.00|1.75|0.50|

Yet, the top-N technique can help avoid the data-sparseness problem of 2nd order features. We define the parameter c2 as the number of visual words each image patch is assigned to when constructing 2nd order features. Notice that c1 and c2 can have different values. In Fig. 8 we show the benefit of increasing c2 from one to ten when constructing spatial features. In Fig. 8(a), two normalized spatial histograms with twelve spatial bins are collected from two different face images.

# 4.5. Robustness of co-occurrence counts

Instead of assigning a local feature descriptor to a single codeword, one can assign it to the top-N closest codewords. In Table 3, we vary the parameter c from one to four and ten, which is the number of codewords each image patch is assigned to. In three out of four categories, the performance of the bag of words representation (using 1st order features only) degrades as c1 increases from one to four or ten, which manifests the popular practice of assigning a descriptor to a single codeword.

# 5. Conclusion and future work

We have presented an approach for integrating the process of feature selection and feature extraction. The integrated approach is three times faster than...

# Figure 9. Effect of increasing the number of visual words a patch is assigned to.

the canonical procedures of feature selection followed by feature extraction. In addition, the integrated approach can achieve comparable or even better accuracy than the exhaustive approach, in spite of its greedy nature. Our approach is generic and can be used with other feature selection methods. It can also be applied to all kinds of spatial histograms. In this work, we considered non-parametric histograms (with spatial bins), but parametric ones could be used as well, where the parameters (e.g., the mean and covariance of point clouds) could be used as features.

Finally, we presented detailed experiments on three different object categorization datasets which have been widely studied. These datasets cover a wide range of variations on object category (20 in total), object scale (most noticeably in the PASCAL dataset) and pose. For each dataset, we used different state-of-the-art local feature descriptors. These experiments demonstrate that our approach applies to a wide range of conditions.

# References

1. S. Belongie, J. Malik, and J. Puzicha. Shape matching and object recognition using shape contexts. PAMI, 24:509–522, 2002.
2. P. Brown, V. Della Pietra, P. de Souza, J. Lai, and R. Mercer. Class-based n-gram models of natural language. Comp. Linguistics, 18(4):467–479, 1992.
3. G. Csurka, C. Dance, L. Fan, J. Willamowski, and C. Bray. Visual categorization with bags of keypoints. In ECCV Workshop Statistical Learning, 2004.
4. M. de Berg, M. van Kreveld, M. Overmars, and O. Schwarzkopf. Computational Geometry, Chap. 5. Springer-Verlag, second edition, 2000.
5. M. Everingham, A. Zisserman, C. K. I. Williams, and L. Van Gool. PASCAL VOC2006 Results. http://www.pascal-network.org/challenges/VOC/voc2006.
6. R. Fergus, P. Perona, and A. Zisserman. Object class recognition by unsupervised scale-invariant learning. CVPR, 2003.
7. F. Fleuret. Fast binary feature selection with conditional mutual information. JMLR, 5:1531–1555, 2004.
8. I. Guyon and A. Elisseeff. An introduction to variable and feature selection. JMLR, 3:1157–1182, 2003.
9. B. Julesz. Textons, the elements of texture perception and their interactions. Nature, 290:91–97, 1981.
10. X. Lan, C. L. Zitnick, and R. Szeliski. Local bi-gram model for object recognition. Technical report, MSR-TR-2007-54, Microsoft Research, 2007.
11. S. Lazebnik, C. Schmid, and J. Ponce. Beyond bags of features: Spatial pyramid matching for recognizing natural scene categories. In CVPR, 2006.
12. D. G. Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. IJCV, 60:91–110, 2004.
13. E. Nowak, F. Jurie, and B. Triggs. Sampling strategies for bag-of-features image classification. In ECCV, 2006.
14. F. Porikli. Integral histogram: a fast way to extract histograms in cartesian spaces. CVPR, 2005.
15. S. Savarese, J. Winn, and A. Criminisi. Discriminative object class models of appearance and shape by correlations. CVPR, 2006.
16. M. Vidal-Naquet and S. Ullman. Object recognition with informative features and linear classification. ICCV, 2003.
17. P. Viola and M. Jones. Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of simple features. CVPR, 2001.
18. L. Yang, P. Meer, and D. Foran. Multiple class segmentation using a unified framework over mean-shift patches. CVPR, 2007.
19. J. Zhang, M. Marszalek, S. Lazebnik, and C. Schmid. Local features and kernels for classification of texture and object categories: A comprehensive study. IJCV, 73 (2):213–238, 2007.
20. J. Zhu, H. Zou, S. Rosset, and T. Hastie. Multi-class adaboost. Submitted, 2005.

