# European Heart Journal (2011) 32, 422–429

# CLINICAL RESEARCH

# doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehq431

# Coronary heart disease

# Fractal analysis of retinal microvasculature and coronary heart disease mortality

Gerald Liew1,2, Paul Mitchell1, Elena Rochtchina1, Tien Yin Wong2,3, Wynne Hsu4, Mong Li Lee⁴, Alan Wainwright¹, and Jie Jin Wang1,2*

1Centre for Vision Research, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 2Centre for Eye Research Australia, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 3Singapore Eye Research Institute, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; and 4School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore

Received 2 May 2010; revised 17 September 2010; accepted 14 October 2010; online publish-ahead-of-print 7 December 2010

# Aim

Fractal analysis provides a global assessment of vascular network architecture. We examined the relationship of retinal vascular fractal dimension (Df) with coronary heart disease (CHD) mortality.

# Methods and results

We examined the relationship of Df with 14-year CHD mortality in a prospective, population-based cohort of 3303 participants aged 49 years or older. Df was measured from digitized fundus photographs using computer-automated methods; CHD mortality was documented from Australian National Death Index records. Mean Df in this population was 1.441 (standard deviation, 0.024). Over 14 years, there were 468 (14.2%) CHD deaths. Participants with suboptimal Df (lowest and highest quartiles) had 50% higher 14-year CHD mortality than those with optimal Df (middle quartiles), after adjusting for age, blood pressure, and other risk factors. Among participants aged ≤70 years, suboptimal Df was associated with a nearly two-fold higher risk of CHD mortality [adjusted hazard ratio (HR) 1.89, 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.25, 2.84 for the lowest quartile and HR 1.87, CI 1.30, 2.69 for the highest quartile, compared with middle quartiles].

# Conclusions

Df is a novel means of quantifying microvascular branching that independently predicted 14-year CHD mortality. These findings suggest that suboptimal microvascular branching may play a role in development of clinical cardiovascular disease.

# Keywords

Microcirculation † Coronary heart disease † Mortality † Fractals † Retinal microcirculation † Blue Mountains Eye Study

# Introduction

Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of death worldwide. While the majority of CHD is attributable to coronary artery disease in the epicardial coronary arteries, there is increasing recognition that coronary microvascular disease also plays an important role, particularly in women, and in those with diabetes. However, directly probing the coronary microcirculation is difficult, and surrogate microvascular beds such as the retinal vascular network have been used to non-invasively study the health of the systemic microcirculation. Most research to date has focused on changes in the calibre of retinal vessels, which are now known to independently predict risk of CHD in women, but this approach is limited as it measures only a single aspect of vascular structure (calibre) and disregards information in branching patterns and density.

Fractal analysis provides a global assessment of the architecture of a vascular network, particularly the branching and density of small vessels. It has been applied in diverse areas of vascular medicine to describe complex bifurcating biological structures such as the branching patterns of retinal, coronary, and pulmonary arterioles, as well as complex biological rhythms such as cardiac arrhythmias. The retinal vasculature can be considered a fractal as it is a geometric pattern whose ‘parts resemble the whole’ (i.e. the property of self-similarity), and is quantified in terms of the fractal dimension. Retinal fractal analysis has recently been applied to study the contribution of microvascular network structure to chronic.

*Corresponding author. Tel: +61 2 9845 5006, Fax: +61 2 9845 8345, Email: jiejin_wang@wmi.usyd.edu.au

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. & The Author 2010. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/32/4/422/440005 by National University of Singapore user on 10 March 2025

# Fractals and CHD

kidney disease (CKD).¹⁷ This work found evidence that suboptimal retinal vascular network is associated with increased risk of CKD, consistent with the Murray principle of minimum work which states that deviations from optimal microvascular architecture may be related to microvascular damage.18 – 20 In this study, we prospectively examined the relationship of retinal fractal dimension (Df) and risk of CHD.

# Methods

# Study population

We examined the relationship of Df and CHD mortality in the Blue Mountains Eye Study, a prospective, population-based cohort of predominantly Caucasian people aged 49 years or older at the study commencement in 1992.⁵ Baseline participants (n ¼ 3654) represented 82.4% of eligible potential participants living in two postcode areas in the Blue Mountains region, New South Wales, Australia, and now have completed follow-up data over 14 years. This study was conducted according to the recommendations of the Declaration of Helsinki, and was approved by the Western Sydney Area Health Service Human Research Ethics Committee and the University of Sydney Human Research Ethics Committee. Written, informed consent was obtained from all participants. We excluded 307 participants with poor-quality photographs unsuitable for measuring Df and 44 whose cause of death was unclear, leaving 3303 participants (90.4%) who comprised the study population.

# Retinal photography and measurement of Df

At the baseline examination, 308 retinal photographs of the optic disc, macula, and other retinal fields of both eyes were taken after pupil dilation using a Zeiss FF3 fundus camera (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). Disc-centred photographs were then digitized and used to measure two parameters: fractal dimension of the retinal vasculature and retinal vessel calibre. Measurement was performed by trained graders masked to participant details.

The programme to measure fractal dimension, International Retinal Imaging Software—Fractal (IRIS—FRACTAL), is described elsewhere.²¹ Brieﬂy, digital monochrome optic disc-centred images of the right retina were viewed on two 17-inch monitors allowing image displays at 1280× 1024 resolution. Trained graders examined boxes of different sizes, the logarithm of the number of boxes containing a segment is plotted against the logarithm of the number of boxes covering the image, and the fractal dimension is calculated from the slope, by the computer program.

Retinal arteriolar and venular calibres were also measured from photographs using a separate computer program (IVAN, University of Wisconsin), described elsewhere.5,23,24 Individual vessel calibre measurements were combined into summary indices, referred to as central retinal artery equivalent and central retinal vein equivalent, which represent the estimated mean retinal arteriolar and venular calibre, respectively. As previously reported, intra- and inter-grader grading agreement was high, with quadratic weighted k values ranging from 0.80 to 0.93.23,25 Further details are given elsewhere.23,25

# Measurement of other variables

Resting systolic and diastolic blood pressure (BP) measurements were taken using the same mercury sphygmomanometer with appropriate adult cuff size after participants had been seated for at least 10 min. We adapted the 2003 World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines defining hypertension, taking as hypertensive grade 2 or above (severe).

hypertension), for those persons previously diagnosed as hypertensive mean Df was 1.434 in persons who died from CHD and 1.442 in those who either survived or died from causes other than CHD. We deﬁned diabetes as a physician diagnosis of diabetes, or fasting blood sugar ≥7mmol/L. Serum total cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol were measured from fasting blood specimens using standard procedures. White blood cell count was determined using Coulter counter methods. We obtained self-reported history of angina and acute myocardial infarction from face-to-face interviews and deﬁned history of CHD if either of these conditions was present. These deﬁnitions are described in detail elsewhere.

# Assessment of coronary heart disease mortality

Coronary heart disease mortality was based on deaths and causes of death from the Australian National Death Index (NDI). Causes of death in the NDI database are collected from death certificates, which are completed by the physician in attendance, coroner, or medical examiner, regardless of whether the death occurred in a hospital or in the community, and recorded using International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes. A CHD death was deﬁned if any of the following codes from ICD-9 was included in the causes of death (410.0 –9, 411.0-8, 412,₅ 414.0-9) and ICD-10 (I21.0-9, I22.0-9, I23.0-8, I24.0-9, I25.0-9). The validity of Australian NDI data is reported to have high sensitivity and speciﬁcity for cardiovascular mortality (92.5 and 89.6%, respectively). The census cut-off for CHD death was 31 December 2005 (14-year follow-up).

# Statistical analysis

We examined 14-year age–gender-adjusted survival curves by quartile of Df, with the 1st quartile representing those with the lowest Df values. We used Cox regression to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% conﬁdence intervals (CIs) of CHD mortality in different quartiles. Multivariable models adjusting for age, gender, and other variables including retinal arteriolar and venular calibre were constructed. We previously reported from this cohort that retinal vascular calibre was associated with incident CHD in persons aged ≤70. We thus performed subgroup analyses by age, as well by gender, hypertension and diabetes status.

We used two methods to test proportional hazards assumptions with respect to the time period variable, namely visual inspection of the log cumulative hazard plots and adding time-dependent variables into the first multivariable model. Age violated the proportional hazards assumption and hence was modelled as a strata variable (in 10-year categories). SAS v9.12 was used for analyses. Two-sided tests were used and P-value <0.05 was used as the threshold for significance. To compare the baseline characteristics across four quartiles, we used GLM (analysis of covariance). P for trend was calculated by using the median of corresponding quartile as the independent variable.

# Role of the funding source

The funding source had no role in the study design; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; or in the decision to submit the paper for publication.

# Results

Mean Df in this population of 3303 older adults was 1.441, with standard deviation (SD) of 0.024. Over the follow-up period of 14 years, 468 participants (14.2%) died of CHD causes.

# Fractals and CHD

|Characteristics of participants in the Blue Mountains Eye Study cohort (n = 3303), by fractal dimension (Df)|Quartiles of Df|P for trend| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |1st|2nd|3rd|4th| | |
|Mean Df (SD)|1.408 (0.018)|1.437 (0.005)|1.450 (0.004)|1.467 (0.008)| | |
|Mean age, years (SD)|71.2 (9.6)|66.0 (8.7)|64.0 (8.4)|61.3 (7.9)|0.0001| |
|Male (%)|39.7|41.9|46.9|46.0|0.002| |
|Mean systolic BP, mmHg (SD)|152 (23)|146 (21)|145 (20)|140 (19)|0.0001| |
|Mean diastolic BP, mmHg (SD)|84 (11)|84 (10)|84 (10)|83 (10)|0.01| |
|Mean arterial BP, mmHg (SD)|106 (13)|104 (12)|104 (12)|102 (12)|0.0001| |
|Body mass index, kg/m² (SD)|25.6 (4.5)|26.0 (4.4)|26.6 (4.8)|26.4 (4.4)|0.0001| |
|Plasma HDL cholesterol, mmol/L (SD)|1.46 (0.43)|1.46 (0.45)|1.41 (0.43)|1.40 (0.45)|0.0001| |
|Triglycerides, mmol/L (SD)|1.7 (1.1)|1.7 (1.0)|1.8 (1.2)|1.9 (1.3)|0.0001| |
|Fasting glucose, mmol/L (SD)|5.4 (1.9)|5.2 (1.2)|5.2 (1.7)|5.2 (1.2)|0.007| |
|White cell count, ×10³ (SD)|6.4 (1.7)|6.6 (1.8)|6.5 (1.6)|6.5 (1.8)|0.61| |
|Plasma fibrinogen, mmol/L (SD)|4.3 (1.1)|4.1 (1.5)|3.9 (1.0)|4.0 (1.0)|0.0001| |
|Hypertensive (%)|79.6|72.4|69.3|61.7|0.0001| |
|Diabetes (%)|10.0|6.3|7.1|7.0|0.05| |
|Current smoking (%)|10.9|15.2|14.3|20.3|0.0001| |
|History of CHD (%)|18.3|14.1|14.6|15.7|0.20| |
|Mean retinal arteriolar calibre, mm (SD)|182 (19)|186 (17)|188 (17)|192 (17)|0.0001| |
|Mean retinal venular calibre, mm (SD)|219 (21)|224 (20)|227 (19)|231 (20)|0.0001| |

SD refers to standard deviation; BP to blood pressure; HDL to high-density lipoprotein; CHD to coronary heart disease.

|100|1st quartile|2nd quartile|3rd quartile|95|4th quartile|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|90| | | |85| |
|80| | | |75| |
|Years|10|11|12|13|14|
|N at risk|3303|3183|3023|2844|2681|
| |2505|2232| | | |

Figure 2 Fractal dimension (Df) and 14-year coronary heart disease mortality (adjusted for age and gender).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/32/4/422/440005 by National University of Singapore user on 10 March 2025

# Table 2 Fractal dimension (Df) and 14-year coronary heart disease mortality

|Quartiles of Df|CHD Mortality|% (n)|Age– sex-adjusted HR (95% CI)|P-value|Multivariate-adjusted HRᵃ (95% CI)|P-value|Multivariate-adjusted HRᵇ (95% CI)|P-value|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1st (lowest, 1.323–1.427)| |22.0 (180)|1.39 (1.12, 1.72)|0.003|1.44 (1.13, 1.83)|0.004|1.51 (1.17, 1.94)|0.002|
|2nd and 3rd (middle, 1.428–1.457)| |11.5 (190)|1.0 (reference)|–|1.0 (reference)|–|1.0 (reference)|–|
|4th (highest, 1.458–1.506)| |11.9 (98)|1.55 (1.21, 1.99)|0.0005|1.51 (1.14, 1.98)|0.004|1.58 (1.19, 2.10)|0.002|

HR refers to hazard ratio; CI to confidence interval.

aMultivariate analyses adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, mean arterial blood pressure, smoking history, diabetes, history of CHD, white cell count, plasma fibrinogen, triglycerides, and high-density cholesterol.

bAdditionally adjusted for retinal arteriolar and venular calibres.

# Table 3 Fractal dimension (Df) and 14-year coronary heart disease mortality, stratified by baseline age

|Quartiles of Df|CHD Mortality|Age ≤70 years| |Age >70 years| | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |% (n)|Multivariate-adjusted HRᵃ (95% CI)|P-value|% (n)|Multivariate-adjusted HRᵃ (95% CI)|P-value|
|1st (lowest)|11.2 (41)|1.89 (1.25, 2.84)|0.002|30.6 (139)|1.21 (0.90, 1.64)|0.21|
|2nd and 3rd|7.0 (86)|1.0 (reference)|–|24.5 (104)|1.0 (reference)|–|
|4th (highest)|8.6 (61)|1.87 (1.30, 2.69)|0.0008|32.2 (37)|1.13 (0.72, 1.78)|0.60|

HR refers to hazard ratio; CI to confidence interval. The P-value for age interaction = 0.06 for low and 0.03 for high Df.

aMultivariate analyses adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, mean arterial blood pressure, smoking history, diabetes, history of CHD, white cell count, plasma fibrinogen, triglycerides, and high-density cholesterol.

From optimal architecture are postulated to result in impaired participants (baseline ages ≤70 years), in whom suboptimal Df predicted an almost two-fold higher risk of CHD mortality. Our results provide new data on the relationship between geometric complexity and optimality of vascular networks and the risk of CHD. There are few studies for direct comparison. In type 1 diabetics, higher retinal Df has been found to be directly related to risk of diabetic retinopathy although another study found lower Df associated with increased risk of proliferative retinopathy. We previously examined a subsample of the current population and showed that reduced Df was associated with higher systolic BP and hypertension. In contrast, another study that recruited 40 participants with acute stroke reported no Df difference between participants with and without hypertension. This second study was acknowledged, however, to have insufficient power to detect small differences in Df. Our findings are consistent with a recent report of a similar U-shaped relationship of suboptimal Df with CKD, which may be attributed to increased tissue stress from impaired flow. A U-shaped relationship of Df and certain stroke subtypes may also apply, as one study reported low Df associated with lacunar stroke while another reported an association with high Df. Case–control studies that find geometric parameters of the retinal vasculature such as branching angles of human retinal vessels and the number of bifurcations, are associated with risk of CHD, stroke and peripheral arterial disease also support our results.

# Fractals and CHD

The pathological processes that underlie variations in Df are not well understood. In our study, all major cardiovascular risk factors were associated with sub-optimal fractals (either reduced or increased Df). We suggest that lower Df may result from a range of cardiovascular processes that include older age and higher levels of BP, fasting glucose, and plasma fibrinogen (a marker of systemic inflammation), all of which were associated with low Df in our population (Table 1). Other studies have also documented an association of lower Df with aging and these associations are consistent with clinical observations that lower Df represents a loss of branches or rarefaction of the microcirculation in older individuals, and in those with hypertension and other vascular diseases. Rarefaction of circulation may predispose to CHD through a reduced ability to form collaterals after ischaemic events. In contrast, a different spectrum of cardiovascular risk factors including male gender, higher BMI, dyslipidaemia (either lower HDL cholesterol or higher triglyceride levels), and smoking were associated with higher Df or increased density or branching of the microvasculature. Higher Df may be a marker of ischaemia, as it also occurs in diabetic retinopathy and anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy (vascular ischaemia of the optic nerve head). Changes in Df may be mediated by the vascular endothelium as it plays a major role in maintaining optimality at vascular branches.

Our group and others previously showed that retinal vascular calibres (either narrower retinal arterioles or wider retinal venules) are also early markers of microvascular disease that independently predict cardiovascular disease and cardiac function needed. Second, although we demonstrate a link between suboptimal microvascular branching and CHD mortality, the mechanism underlying these observations is unclear. We speculate that this is related to inefficient transport which, through the Murray principle of minimum work, results in cardiovascular disease. More definitive evidence demonstrating inefficient flow and increased ischaemia in the presence of suboptimal Df should be obtained from animal or human tissue models, as well as longitudinal studies. Our study, using data from photographs collected in 1992–94, did not measure functional characteristics of the retinal microvasculature. Such measures would provide greater insight into the inter-relationship of vascular morphology and function and clinical cardiovascular events. It is likely that vasoactive substances influence both vascular function and morphology, and interact to cause clinical disease. Few studies have examined this aspect. One study in patients with brain tumours found a direct correlation of in vivo metabolism with histological cerebral tissue fractal dimension, illustrating the close link between branching and metabolism. Other studies have shown that changes in retinal vascular calibre, a feature highly correlated with retinal fractals, are associated with brachial flow-mediated vasodilation and impaired flicker-induced retinal vasodilatory response, both measures of nitric oxide processes and thus endothelial function. Retinal arteriolar calibre is also associated with measures of myocardial blood flow and perfusion in asymptomatic patients with no evidence of coronary atherosclerosis. Further research combining both morphological and functional assessment of the retinal vasculature would be informative. Finally, although we collected information on and controlled for important confounders, other unmeasured factors (e.g. use of vasodilator drugs and ...

|Table 1|Table 1|
|---|
|Cardiovascular Risk Factors|Association with Df|
|Older Age|Lower Df|
|Higher BP|Lower Df|
|Fasting Glucose|Lower Df|
|Plasma Fibrinogen|Lower Df|
|Male Gender|Higher Df|
|Higher BMI|Higher Df|
|Dyslipidaemia|Higher Df|
|Smoking|Higher Df|

|Table 3|Table 3|
|---|
|Age Group|Association with Df|
|Under 70|Stronger Association|
|Over 70|Weaker Association|

other subclinical vascular co-morbidities) could have affected or depressed left ventricular function after an acute myocardial infarction. Circulation 2000;101:47–53.

In summary, we show that persons with suboptimal retinal vascular branching (either low or high values of Df, representing sparser or denser branching patterns, respectively) have higher CHD mortality when compared with persons with values around the population mean. This increased risk is independent of age, gender, smoking, BP, and other risk factors. Our results highlight the role that microvascular branching patterns may play in developing cardiovascular disease. Further research into the role of microvascular branching and transport efficiency in maintaining healthy vascular systems may provide novel understanding of the genesis of cardiovascular disease as well as potential new targets for diagnosis, prevention and treatment.

# Acknowledgements

The authors thank the other investigators, staff, and the participants of the Blue Mountains Eye Study for their valuable contributions.

# Funding

This work was supported by Singapore Bioimaging Consortium (SBIC RP C-011/2006); National Medical Research Council (NMRC/STaR/0003/2008); Australian National Health & Medical Research Council (NHMRC, Project grant IDs: 153948, 211069, and 302068); Pfizer Australia (Cardiovascular Lipid Grant 2007); and Diabetes Australia Research Trust (DART Grant 2007).

# Conflict of interest:

All authors declare they have no relevant relationships with industry.

# References

1. Camici PG, Crea F. Coronary microvascular dysfunction. N Engl J Med 2007;356:830–840.
2. Patton N, Aslam TM, MacGillivray T, Deary IJ, Dhillon B, Eikelboom RH, Yogesan K, Constable IJ. Retinal image analysis: concepts, applications and potential. Prog Retin Eye Res 2006;25:99–127.
3. Liew G, Wang JJ, Mitchell P, Wong TY. Retinal vascular imaging: a new tool in microvascular disease research. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2008;1:156–161.
4. Wong TY, Mitchell P. Hypertensive retinopathy. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2310–2317.
5. Wang JJ, Liew G, Klein R, Rochtchina E, Knudtson MD, Klein BE, Wong TY, Burlutsky G, Mitchell P. Retinal vessel diameter and cardiovascular mortality: pooled data analysis from two older populations. Eur Heart J 2007;28:1984–1992.
6. McGeechan K, Liew G, Macaskill P, Irwig L, Klein R, Klein BE, Wang JJ, Mitchell P, Vingerling JR, Dejong PT, Witteman JC, Breteler MM, Wong TY. Meta-analysis: retinal vessel caliber and risk for coronary heart disease. Ann Intern Med 2009;151:404–413.
7. Fractals and medicine. Lancet 1991;338:1425–1426.
8. Macgillivray TJ, Patton N, Doubal FN, Graham C, Wardlaw JM. Fractal analysis of the retinal vascular network in fundus images. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc 2007;1:6455–6458.
9. McKay TL, Gedeon DJ, Vickerman MB, Hylton AG, Ribita D, Olar HH, Kaiser PK, Parsons-Wingerter P. Selective inhibition of angiogenesis in small blood vessels and decrease in vessel diameter throughout the vascular tree by triamcinolone acetonide. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2008;49:1184–1190.
10. James TN. The spectrum of diseases of small coronary arteries and their physiologic consequences. J Am Coll Cardiol 1990;15:763–774.
11. Boxt LM, Katz J, Liebovitch LS, Jones R, Esser PD, Reid L. Fractal analysis of pulmonary arteries: the fractal dimension is lower in pulmonary hypertension. J Thorac Imaging 1994;9:8–13.
12. Guzzetti S, La Rovere MT, Pinna GD, Maestri R, Borroni E, Porta A, Mortara A, Malliani A. Different spectral components of 24 h heart rate variability are related to different modes of death in chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J 2005;26:357–362.
13. Huikuri HV, Makikallio TH, Peng CK, Goldberger AL, Hintze U, Moller M. Fractal correlation properties of R-R interval dynamics and mortality in patients with chronic heart failure. Circulation 2000;101:47–53.
14. Tulppo MP, Kiviniemi AM, Hautala AJ, Kallio M, Seppanen T, Makikallio TH, Huikuri HV. Physiological background of the loss of fractal heart rate dynamics. Circulation 2005;112:314–319.
15. Mandelbrot BB. The Fractal Geometry of Nature. New York: WH Freeman; 1983. p151–165.
16. Masters BR. Fractal analysis of the vascular tree in the human retina. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 2004;6:427–452.
17. Sng CC, Sabanayagam C, Lamoureux EL, Liu E, Lim SC, Hamzah H, Lee J, Tai ES, Wong TY. Fractal analysis of the retinal vasculature and chronic kidney disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010;25:2252–2258.
18. Rossitti S, Lofgren J. Optimality principles and flow orderliness at the branching points of cerebral arteries. Stroke 1993;24:1029–1032.
19. Changizi MA, Cherniak C. Modeling the large-scale geometry of human coronary arteries. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 2000;78:603–611.
20. Murray CD. The physiological principle of minimum work: I. The vascular system and the cost of blood volume. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1926;12:207–214.
21. Liew G, Wang JJ, Cheung N, Zhang YP, Hsu W, Lee ML, Mitchell P, Tikellis G, Taylor B, Wong TY. The retinal vasculature as a fractal: methodology, reliability, and relationship to blood pressure. Ophthalmology 2008;115:1951–1956.
22. Stosic T, Stosic BD. Multifractal analysis of human retinal vessels. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 2006;25:1101–1107.
23. Wang JJ, Liew G, Wong TY, Smith W, Klein R, Leeder S, Mitchell P. Retinal vascular caliber and the risk of coronary heart disease-related mortality. Heart 2006;92:1583–1587.
24. Cheung N, Bluemke DA, Klein R, Sharrett AR, Islam FM, Cotch MF, Klein BE, Criqui MH, Wong TY. Retinal arteriolar narrowing and left ventricular remodeling: the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;50:48–55.
25. Mitchell P, Liew G, Rochtchina E, Wang JJ, Robaei D, Cheung N, Wong TY. Evidence of arteriolar narrowing in low-birth-weight children. Circulation 2008;118:518–524.
26. Magliano D, Liew D, Pater H, Kirby A, Hunt D, Simes J, Sundararajan V, Tonkin A. Accuracy of the Australian National Death Index: comparison with adjudicated fatal outcomes among Australian participants in the Long-term Intervention with Pravastatin in Ischaemic Disease (LIPID) study. Aust N Z J Public Health 2003;27:649–653.
27. Zamir M, Chee H. Branching characteristics of human coronary arteries. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 1986;64:661–668.
28. Zamir M. Cost analysis of arterial branching in the cardiovascular systems of man and animals. J Theor Biol 1986;120:111–123.
29. Cheung N, Donaghue KC, Liew G, Rogers SL, Wang JJ, Lim SW, Jenkins AJ, Hsu W, Li LM, Wong TY. Quantitative assessment of early diabetic retinopathy using fractal analysis. Diabetes Care 2009;32:106–110.
30. Grauslund J, Green A, Kawasaki R, Hodgson L, Sjolie AK, Wong TY. Retinal vascular fractals and microvascular and macrovascular complications in type 1 diabetes. Ophthalmology 2010;117:1400–1405.
31. Cheung N, Liew G, Lindley RI, Liu EY, Wang JJ, Hand P, Baker M, Mitchell P, Wong TY. Retinal fractals and acute lacunar stroke. Ann Neurol 2010;68:107–111.
32. Doubal FN, Macgillivray TJ, Patton N, Dhillon B, Dennis MS, Wardlaw JM. Fractal analysis of retinal vessels suggests that a distinct vasculopathy causes lacunar stroke. Neurology 2010;74:1102–1107.
33. Witt N, Wong TY, Hughes AD, Chaturvedi N, Klein BE, Evans R, McNamara M, Thom SA, Klein R. Abnormalities of retinal microvascular structure and risk of mortality from ischemic heart disease and stroke. Hypertension 2006;47:975–981.
34. Chapman N, Dell’Omo G, Sartini MS, Witt N, Hughes A, Thom S, Pedrinelli R. Peripheral vascular disease is associated with abnormal arteriolar diameter relationships at bifurcations in the human retina. Clin Sci (Colch) 2002;103:111–116.
35. Patton N, Aslam T, MacGillivray T, Pattie A, Deary IJ, Dhillon B. Retinal vascular image analysis as a potential screening tool for cerebrovascular disease: a rationale based on homology between cerebral and retinal microvasculatures. J Anat 2005;206:319–348.
36. Hughes AD, Martinez-Perez E, Jabbar AS, Hassan A, Witt NW, Mistry PD, Chapman N, Stanton AV, Beevers G, Pedrinelli R, Parker KH, Thom SA. Quantification of topological changes in retinal vascular architecture in essential and malignant hypertension. J Hypertens 2006;24:889–894.
37. Stanton AV, Wasan B, Cerutti A, Ford S, Marsh R, Sever PP, Thom SA, Hughes AD. Vascular network changes in the retina with age and hypertension. J Hypertens 1995;13(12 Pt 2):1724–1728.
38. Kwa VI, Lopez OL. Fractal analysis of retinal vessels: peeping at the tree of life? Neurology 2010;74:1088–1089.
39. Daxer A. Characterisation of the neovascularisation process in diabetic retinopathy by means of fractal geometry: diagnostic implications. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol 1993;231:681–686.

# Fractals and CHD

40. Traversi C, Bianciardi G, Tasciotti A, Berni E, Nuti E, Luzi P, Tosi GM. Fractal analysis of fluoroangiographic patterns in anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy and optic neuritis: a pilot study. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol 2008;36: 323 –328.

41. Sherman TF, Popel AS, Koller A, Johnson PC. The cost of departure from optimal radii in microvascular networks. J Theor Biol 1989;136:245 –265.

42. Wong TY, Mitchell P. The eye in hypertension. Lancet 2007;369:425–435.

43. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R. Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet 2002;360: 1903– 1913.

44. Jee SH, Sull JW, Park J, Lee SY, Ohrr H, Guallar E, Samet JM. Body-mass index and mortality in Korean men and women. N Engl J Med 2006;355:779 –787.

45. Sax FL, Cannon RO III, Hanson C, Epstein SE. Impaired forearm vasodilator reserve in patients with microvascular angina. Evidence of a generalized disorder of vascular function? N Engl J Med1987;317:1366 –1370.

46. Moledina S, de Bruyn A, Schievano S, Haworth SG, Schulze-Neick I, Taylor AM. Abstract 5931: fractal dimension: a novel method of quantifying vascular structural changes in pulmonary hypertension. Circulation 2009;120:S1177 – S117b.

47. Di Ieva A, Grizzi F, Tschabitscher M, Colombo P, Casali M, Simonelli M, Widhalm G, Muzzio PC, Matula C, Chiti A, Rodriguez YB. Correlation of microvascular fractal dimension with positron emission tomography [(11)C]-methionine uptake in glioblastoma multiforme: preliminary findings. Microvasc Res 2010;80:267–273.

48. Nguyen TT, Islam FM, Farouque HM, Klein R, Klein BE, Cotch MF, Herrington DM, Wong TY. Retinal vascular caliber and brachial flow-mediated dilation: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Stroke 2010;41:1343 –1348.

49. Nguyen TT, Kawasaki R, Kreis AJ, Wang JJ, Shaw J, Vilser W, Wong TY. Correlation of light-flicker-induced retinal vasodilation and retinal vascular caliber measurements in diabetes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;50:5609 –5613.

50. Wang L, Wong TY, Sharrett AR, Klein R, Folsom AR, Jerosch-Herold M. Relationship between retinal arteriolar narrowing and myocardial perfusion: multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Hypertension 2008;51:119–126.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehq365

Online publish-ahead-of-print 5 October 2010

# CARDIOVASCULAR FLASHLIGHT

# Pneumomediastinum after implantable cardiac defibrillator implantation

Nicolas Girerd1, Anne-Sophie Lienhart1, and Philippe Chevalier1,2*

1Department of Rhythmology, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Louis Pradel Cardiovascular Hospital, 59 bd Pinel, 69677 Lyon-Bron Cedex, France and 2Lyon Reference Center for inherited Arrhythmias, Louis Pradel Cardiovascular Hospital, Lyon, France

*Corresponding author. Tel: +33 4 72 68 49 46, Fax: +33 4 72 35 73 41, Email: philippe.chevalier@chu-lyon.fr

A 66-year-old male with prior tuberculosis pleuritis and anterior myocardial infarction was admitted to our hospital for sustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. The patient was already on oral amiodarone, sotalol, and perindopril. Invasive external overdrive pacing terminated the arrhythmia. Acute ischaemia was ruled out and an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) implantation was decided. A Medtronic-6931 defibrillator lead was placed in the right ventricle and a Medtronic-5076 lead was easily placed in the right atrial appendage. Both leads were inserted via the left cephalic vein and connected to a Medtronic INTRINSIC-7288 ICD implanted in the pre-pectoral area. Normal sensing and capture were obtained.

The day after implantation, the patient complained of chest pain increased by deep breathing. Clinical examination and chest X-ray were unremarkable. Echocardiography showed no pericardial effusion. The next day, chest X-ray showed a right partial pneumothorax (Panel A). Atrial-pacing threshold had dramatically increased (.6 V) and P-wave sensing was poor (0.3 mV). In addition to pneumothorax, thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed pneumopericardium and pneumomediastinum (Panels B and C, black arrows), likely due to an atrial lead pleuropericardial perforation. A slight extrusion of the atrial lead through the atrium was identified (Panel D, white arrow). The atrial lead was extracted in emergency under general anaesthesia. The procedure was uncomplicated. The CT performed 5 days later found no residual pneumopericardium or pneumomediastinum. A 3-year follow-up revealed no complications.

This case reminds us that severe mechanical complications can occur after pacemaker or ICD implantation, especially in patients with lung disease history. With this regard, CT is of particular interest in the early post-procedure period.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. & The Author 2010. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.

