# Recent Advances in Convolutional Neural Networks

In the last few years, deep learning has led to very good performance on a variety of problems, such as visual recognition, speech recognition and natural language processing. Among different types of deep neural networks, convolutional neural networks have been most extensively studied. Leveraging on the rapid growth in the amount of the annotated data and the great improvements in the strengths of graphics processor units, the research on convolutional neural networks has been emerged swiftly and achieved state-of-the-art results on various tasks. In this paper, we provide a broad survey of the recent advances in convolutional neural networks. We detailize the improvements of CNN on different aspects, including layer design, activation function, loss function, regularization, optimization and fast computation. Besides, we also introduce various applications of convolutional neural networks in computer vision, speech and natural language processing.

Skip to main content

We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation, member institutions, and all contributors.
Donate

# Recent Advances in Convolutional Neural Networks

# Authors

Gu, Jiuxiang

Wang, Zhenhua

Kuen, Jason

Ma, Lianyang

Shahroudy, Amir

Shuai, Bing

Liu, Ting

Wang, Xingxing

Wang, Li

Wang, Gang

Cai, Jianfei

Chen, Tsuhan

# Abstract

In the last few years, deep learning has led to very good performance on a variety of problems, such as visual recognition, speech recognition and natural language processing. Among different types of deep neural networks, convolutional neural networks have been most extensively studied. Leveraging on the rapid growth in the amount of the annotated data and the great improvements in the strengths of graphics processor units, the research on convolutional neural networks has been emerged swiftly and achieved state-of-the-art results on various tasks. In this paper, we provide a broad survey of the recent advances in convolutional neural networks. We detailize the improvements of CNN on different aspects, including layer design, activation function, loss function, regularization, optimization and fast computation. Besides, we also introduce various applications of convolutional neural networks in computer vision, speech and natural language processing.

&gt;
cs
&gt;
arXiv:1512.07108

Help | Advanced Search

All fields
Title
Author
Abstract
Comments
Journal reference
ACM classification
MSC classification
Report number
arXiv identifier
DOI
ORCID
arXiv author ID
Help pages
Full text

Search

# Recent Advances in Convolutional Neural Networks

# Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition

arXiv:1512.07108 (cs)

[Submitted on 22 Dec 2015 (v1), last revised 19 Oct 2017 (this version, v6)]

# Title:Recent Advances in Convolutional Neural Networks

Authors:
Jiuxiang Gu,
Zhenhua Wang,
Jason Kuen,
Lianyang Ma,
Amir Shahroudy,
Bing Shuai,
Ting Liu,
Xingxing Wang,
Li Wang,
Gang Wang,
Jianfei Cai,
Tsuhan Chen

View a PDF of the paper titled Recent Advances in Convolutional Neural Networks, by Jiuxiang Gu and 11 other authors

View PDF

Abstract:In the last few years, deep learning has led to very good performance on a variety of problems, such as visual recognition, speech recognition and natural language processing. Among different types of deep neural networks, convolutional neural networks have been most extensively studied. Leveraging on the rapid growth in the amount of the annotated data and the great improvements in the strengths of graphics processor units, the research on convolutional neural networks has been emerged swiftly and achieved state-of-the-art results on various tasks. In this paper, we provide a broad survey of the recent advances in convolutional neural networks. We detailize the improvements of CNN on different aspects, including layer design, activation function, loss function, regularization, optimization and fast computation. Besides, we also introduce various applications of convolutional neural networks in computer vision, speech and natural language processing.

Comments:
Pattern Recognition, Elsevier

# Submission history

From: Jiuxiang Gu Mr [view email]
<br/>
[v1]
Tue, 22 Dec 2015 14:54:34 UTC (1,693 KB)<br/>
[v2]
Tue, 5 Jul 2016 11:39:16 UTC (578 KB)<br/>
[v3]
Mon, 1 Aug 2016 01:54:59 UTC (439 KB)<br/>
[v4]
Sat, 6 Aug 2016 12:38:35 UTC (438 KB)<br/>
[v5]
Thu, 5 Jan 2017 05:45:53 UTC (3,100 KB)<br/>
[v6]
Thu, 19 Oct 2017 16:34:35 UTC (4,099 KB)<br/>

|Subjects:|Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV); Machine Learning (cs.LG); Neural and Evolutionary Computing (cs.NE)|
|---|---|
|Cite as:|arXiv:1512.07108 [cs.CV]|
|&nbsp;|(or arXiv:1512.07108v6 [cs.CV] for this version)|
|&nbsp;|https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1512.07108  <svg height="15" role="presentation" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512"> </path> </svg> Focus to learn more   arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite|

Full-text links:
# Access Paper:

- View a PDF of the paper titled Recent Advances in Convolutional Neural Networks, by Jiuxiang Gu and 11 other authors

View PDF
- TeX Source
- Other Formats

view license

Current browse context:
cs.CV

&lt;&nbsp;prev

&nbsp; | &nbsp;

next&nbsp;&gt;

<br/>

new
|
recent
|
2015-12

Change to browse by:

cs<br class="is-hidden-mobile">
cs.LG<br class="is-hidden-mobile">
cs.NE<br class="is-hidden-mobile">

# References &amp; Citations

- NASA ADS
- Google Scholar
- Semantic Scholar

# DBLP - CS Bibliography

listing |
bibtex

Jiuxiang Gu<br/>
Zhenhua Wang<br/>
Jason Kuen<br/>
Lianyang Ma<br/>
Amir Shahroudy
&hellip;

a
export BibTeX citation
Loading...

# BibTeX formatted citation

&times;

loading...

Data provided by:

# Bookmark

Bibliographic Tools

# Bibliographic and Citation Tools

Bibliographic Explorer Toggle

Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)

Connected Papers Toggle

Connected Papers (What is Connected Papers?)

Litmaps Toggle

Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)

<input
id="scite-toggle"
type="checkbox"
class="lab-toggle"
data-script-url="/static/browse/0.3.4/js/scite.js?20210617"
aria-labelledby="label-for-scite">

scite.ai Toggle

scite Smart Citations (<a
href="https://www.scite.ai/" target="_blank">What are Smart Citations?)

Code, Data, Media

# Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article

<input
id="alphaxiv-toggle"
data-script-url="/static/browse/0.3.4/js/alphaxiv.js"
type="checkbox" class="lab-toggle" aria-labelledby="label-for-alphaxiv">

alphaXiv Toggle

alphaXiv (<a
href="https://alphaxiv.org/" target="_blank">What is alphaXiv?)

<input
id="catalyzex-toggle"
data-script-url="/static/browse/0.3.4/js/catalyzex.js"
type="checkbox" class="lab-toggle" aria-labelledby="label-for-cx">

Links to Code Toggle

CatalyzeX Code Finder for Papers
(What is CatalyzeX?)

DagsHub Toggle

DagsHub (What is DagsHub?)

GotitPub Toggle

Gotit.pub (What is GotitPub?)

Huggingface Toggle

Hugging Face (What is Huggingface?)

Paper with Code Toggle

Paper with Code (What is Paper with Code?)

Links to Code Toggle

Papers with Code (What is Papers with Code?)

ScienceCast Toggle

ScienceCast (What is ScienceCast?)

Demos

# Demos

Replicate Toggle

Replicate
(What is Replicate?)

Spaces Toggle

Hugging Face Spaces
(What is Spaces?)

Spaces Toggle

TXYZ.AI
(What is TXYZ.AI?)

Related Papers

# Recommenders and Search Tools

Link to Influence Flower

Influence Flower
(What are)

Core recommender toggle

CORE Recommender (What is CORE?)

Author
Venue
Institution
Topic

<svg id="flower-graph-author"></svg>

<svg id="flower-graph-venue"></svg>

<svg id="flower-graph-inst"></svg>

<svg id="flower-graph-topic"></svg>

About arXivLabs

# arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators

arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.

Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.

Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.

Which authors of this paper are endorsers? |
Disable MathJax  (What is MathJax?)

mathjaxToggle();

About
Help

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512" class="icon  filter-black" role="presentation">
# contact arXiv
<desc>Click here to contact arXiv</desc>

</svg>
Contact

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512" class="icon  filter-black" role="presentation">
# subscribe to arXiv mailings
<desc>Click here to subscribe</desc>

</svg>
Subscribe

Copyright
Privacy Policy

Web Accessibility Assistance

arXiv Operational Status
<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 256 512" class="icon filter-dark_grey" role="presentation">

</svg>

Get status notifications via

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512" class="icon filter-black" role="presentation">

</svg>

- email
or
slack

