# Multiple-Human Parsing in the Wild

Human parsing is attracting increasing research attention. In this work, we aim to push the frontier of human parsing by introducing the problem of multi-human parsing in the wild. Existing works on human parsing mainly tackle single-person scenarios, which deviates from real-world applications where multiple persons are present simultaneously with interaction and occlusion. To address the multi-human parsing problem, we introduce a new multi-human parsing (MHP) dataset and a novel multi-human parsing model named MH-Parser. The MHP dataset contains multiple persons captured in real-world scenes with pixel-level fine-grained semantic annotations in an instance-aware setting. The MH-Parser generates global parsing maps and person instance masks simultaneously in a bottom-up fashion with the help of a new Graph-GAN model. We envision that the MHP dataset will serve as a valuable data resource to develop new multi-human parsing models, and the MH-Parser offers a strong baseline to drive future research for multi-human parsing in the wild.

Skip to main content

We gratefully acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation, member institutions, and all contributors.
Donate

# Multiple-Human Parsing in the Wild

Authors: Jianshu Li, Jian Zhao, Yunchao Wei, Congyan Lang, Yidong Li, Terence Sim, Shuicheng Yan, Jiashi Feng

Published on: 2017/05/19

Online date: 2018/03/15

PDF URL: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1705.07206

Abstract: Human parsing is attracting increasing research attention. In this work, we aim to push the frontier of human parsing by introducing the problem of multi-human parsing in the wild. Existing works on human parsing mainly tackle single-person scenarios, which deviates from real-world applications where multiple persons are present simultaneously with interaction and occlusion. To address the multi-human parsing problem, we introduce a new multi-human parsing (MHP) dataset and a novel multi-human parsing model named MH-Parser. The MHP dataset contains multiple persons captured in real-world scenes with pixel-level fine-grained semantic annotations in an instance-aware setting. The MH-Parser generates global parsing maps and person instance masks simultaneously in a bottom-up fashion with the help of a new Graph-GAN model. We envision that the MHP dataset will serve as a valuable data resource to develop new multi-human parsing models, and the MH-Parser offers a strong baseline to drive future research for multi-human parsing in the wild.

&gt;
cs
&gt; arXiv:1705.07206

Help | Advanced Search

All fields
Title
Author
Abstract
Comments
Journal reference
ACM classification
MSC classification
Report number
arXiv identifier
DOI
ORCID
arXiv author ID
Help pages
Full text

Search

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512" class="icon filter-white">
# open search

# Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition

arXiv:1705.07206 (cs)

[Submitted on 19 May 2017 (v1), last revised 15 Mar 2018 (this version, v2)]

# Title:Multiple-Human Parsing in the Wild

Authors:
Jianshu Li,
Jian Zhao,
Yunchao Wei,
Congyan Lang,
Yidong Li,
Terence Sim,
Shuicheng Yan,
Jiashi Feng

View a PDF of the paper titled Multiple-Human Parsing in the Wild, by Jianshu Li and 7 other authors

View PDF

Abstract:Human parsing is attracting increasing research attention. In this work, we aim to push the frontier of human parsing by introducing the problem of multi-human parsing in the wild. Existing works on human parsing mainly tackle single-person scenarios, which deviates from real-world applications where multiple persons are present simultaneously with interaction and occlusion. To address the multi-human parsing problem, we introduce a new multi-human parsing (MHP) dataset and a novel multi-human parsing model named MH-Parser. The MHP dataset contains multiple persons captured in real-world scenes with pixel-level fine-grained semantic annotations in an instance-aware setting. The MH-Parser generates global parsing maps and person instance masks simultaneously in a bottom-up fashion with the help of a new Graph-GAN model. We envision that the MHP dataset will serve as a valuable data resource to develop new multi-human parsing models, and the MH-Parser offers a strong baseline to drive future research for multi-human parsing in the wild.

|Comments:|The first two authors are with equal contribution|
|---|---|
|Subjects:|Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV)|
|Cite as:|arXiv:1705.07206 [cs.CV]|

# Submission history

From: Jian Zhao [view email]
<br/>
[v1]
Fri, 19 May 2017 21:59:09 UTC (1,829 KB)<br/>
[v2]
Thu, 15 Mar 2018 03:09:48 UTC (1,569 KB)<br/>

Full-text links:
# Access Paper:

- View a PDF of the paper titled Multiple-Human Parsing in the Wild, by Jianshu Li and 7 other authors

View PDF
- TeX Source
- Other Formats

view license

Current browse context: cs.CV

|&nbsp;|(or  arXiv:1705.07206v2 [cs.CV] for this version)|
|---|---|
|&nbsp;|https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1705.07206  <svg height="15" role="presentation" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512"> </path> </svg> Focus to learn more   arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite|

&lt;&nbsp;prev

&nbsp; | &nbsp;

next&nbsp;&gt;

<br/>

new
|
recent
|
2017-05

Change to browse by:

cs<br class="is-hidden-mobile">

# References &amp; Citations

- NASA ADS
- Google Scholar
- Semantic Scholar

# DBLP - CS Bibliography

listing | bibtex

Jianshu Li<br/>
Jian Zhao<br/>
Yunchao Wei<br/>
Congyan Lang<br/>
Yidong Li
&hellip;

# Bookmark

Bibliographic Tools

# Bibliographic and Citation Tools

Bibliographic Explorer Toggle

Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)

a
export BibTeX citation
Loading...

# BibTeX formatted citation

&times;

loading...

Data provided by:

<input
id="connectedpapers-toggle"
type="checkbox"
class="lab-toggle"
data-script-url="/static/browse/0.3.4/js/connectedpapers.js"
aria-labelledby="label-for-connected-papers">

Connected Papers Toggle

Connected Papers
(What is Connected Papers?)

<input
id="litmaps-toggle"
type="checkbox"
class="lab-toggle"
data-script-url="/static/browse/0.3.4/js/litmaps.js?20210617"
aria-labelledby="label-for-litmaps">

Litmaps Toggle

Litmaps
(What is Litmaps?)

<input
id="scite-toggle"
type="checkbox"
class="lab-toggle"
data-script-url="/static/browse/0.3.4/js/scite.js?20210617"
aria-labelledby="label-for-scite">

scite.ai Toggle

scite Smart Citations
(What are Smart Citations?)

Code, Data, Media

# Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article

alphaXiv Toggle

alphaXiv (What is alphaXiv?)

Links to Code Toggle

CatalyzeX Code Finder for Papers (What is CatalyzeX?)

DagsHub Toggle

DagsHub (What is DagsHub?)

GotitPub Toggle

Gotit.pub (What is GotitPub?)

Huggingface Toggle

Hugging Face (What is Huggingface?)

Links to Code Toggle

Papers with Code (What is Papers with Code?)

ScienceCast Toggle

ScienceCast (What is ScienceCast?)

Demos

# Demos

Replicate Toggle

Replicate (What is Replicate?)

Spaces Toggle

Hugging Face Spaces (What is Spaces?)

Related Papers

# Recommenders and Search Tools

Link to Influence Flower

Influence Flower (What are Influence Flowers?)

Core recommender toggle

CORE Recommender (What is CORE?)

Author
Venue
NO_CONTENT_HERE

# arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators

arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.

Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.

Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" role="presentation" viewBox="0 0 635.572 811">

</svg>

Which authors of this paper are endorsers? |
Disable MathJax (What is MathJax?)

mathjaxToggle();

About
Help

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512" class="icon filter-black" role="presentation">
# contact arXiv
<desc>Click here to contact arXiv</desc>

</svg>
Contact

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512" class="icon filter-black" role="presentation">
# subscribe to arXiv mailings
<desc>Click here to subscribe</desc>

</svg>
Subscribe

Copyright
Privacy Policy

arXiv Operational Status
<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 256 512" class="icon filter-dark_grey" role="presentation">

</svg>

Get status notifications via

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 512 512" class="icon filter-black" role="presentation">

</svg>email
or

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 448 512" class="icon filter-black" role="presentation">

</svg>slack

</div> <!-- end MetaColumn 2 -->
        <!-- End Macro-Column 2 -->
      </div>
    </footer>
  </div>
  <script src="/static/base/1.0.1/js/member_acknowledgement.js"></script>
</body>
</html>

