# Articles

# A deep learning algorithm to detect chronic kidney disease from retinal photographs in community-based populations

Charumathi Sabanayagam, Dejiang Xu, Daniel S W Ting, Simon Nusinovici, Riswana Banu, Haslina Hamzah, Cynthia Lim, Yih-Chung Tham, Carol Y Cheung, E Shyong Tai, Ya Xing Wang, Jost B Jonas, Ching-Yu Cheng, Mong Li Lee, Wynne Hsu, Tien Y Wong

# Summary

# Background

Screening for chronic kidney disease is a challenge in community and primary care settings, even in high-income countries. We developed an artificial intelligence deep learning algorithm (DLA) to detect chronic kidney disease from retinal images, which could add to existing chronic kidney disease screening strategies.

# Methods

We used data from three population-based, multiethnic, cross-sectional studies in Singapore and China. The Singapore Epidemiology of Eye Diseases study (SEED, patients aged ≥40 years) was used to develop (5188 patients) and validate (1297 patients) the DLA. External testing was done on two independent datasets: the Singapore Prospective Study Program (SP2, 3735 patients aged ≥25 years) and the Beijing Eye Study (BES, 1538 patients aged ≥40 years). Chronic kidney disease was defined as estimated glomerular filtration rate less than 60 mL/min per 1.73m². Three models were trained: 1) image DLA; 2) risk factors (RF) including age, sex, ethnicity, diabetes, and hypertension; and 3) hybrid DLA combining image and RF. Model performances were evaluated using the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC).

# Findings

In the SEED validation dataset, the AUC was 0.911 for image DLA (95% CI 0.886 –0.936), 0.916 for RF (0.891–0.941), and 0.938 for hybrid DLA (0.917–0.959). Corresponding estimates in the SP2 testing dataset were 0.733 for image DLA (95% CI 0.696–0.770), 0.829 for RF (0.797–0.861), and 0.810 for hybrid DLA (0.776–0.844); and in the BES testing dataset estimates were 0.835 for image DLA (0.767–0.903), 0.887 for RF (0.828–0.946), and 0.858 for hybrid DLA (0.794–0.922). AUC estimates were similar in subgroups of people with diabetes (image DLA 0.889 [95% CI 0.850–0.928], RF 0.899 [0.862–0.936], hybrid 0.925 [0.893–0.957]) and hypertension (image DLA 0.889 [95% CI 0.860–0.918], RF 0.889 [0.860–0.918], hybrid 0.918 [0.893–0.943]).

# Interpretation

A retinal image DLA shows good performance for estimating chronic kidney disease, underlying the feasibility of using retinal photography as an adjunctive or opportunistic screening tool for chronic kidney disease in community populations.

# Funding

National Medical Research Council, Singapore.

# Copyright

© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license.

# Introduction

Chronic kidney disease is a major global public health problem. Because earlier detection of chronic kidney disease allows appropriate interventions, regular screening is recommended for the general population, and in high-risk populations (eg, patients with diabetes or hypertension, and specific ethnic groups). However, screening of chronic kidney disease depends on measurement of the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR, calculated from serum creatinine), or urine tests for protein or albumin. Because serum or urine samples must be obtained, adherence to screening is low, even in high-income countries and in at-risk populations. A study in Australia showed that nearly 50% of patients with diabetes attending general practice had not been screened for chronic kidney disease in the previous 18 months. Although a urine sample is less invasive and easier to obtain, albuminuria is highly variable, with intra-individual variation of up to 50%. In this study, we developed and validated a DLA for predicting chronic kidney disease.

# Articles

# Research in context

Chronic kidney disease is a major cause of preventable morbidity and mortality, and screening is recommended for at-risk populations such as in people with diabetes or hypertension. Screening of chronic kidney disease relies on measuring serum concentration of creatinine or testing urine for protein, which might not be practical in all settings. Other screening approaches have been explored, including using clinical risk factor model-based prediction scores before evaluating with serum creatinine. The Screening for Occult Renal Disease model using several demographic and clinical variables showed modest performance with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0·88 in internal validation model and 0·71 in external validation model. Artificial intelligence-based deep learning algorithms (DLAs) using imaging data have been shown to have superior performance in diagnosing conditions like diabetic retinopathy and skin cancer. Retinal photography is non-invasive and is increasingly commonly used in the community and primary care setting to screen for eye diseases, particularly in patients with diabetes. The retina shares a close biological relationship with the kidney, and retinal microvascular abnormalities like retinopathy and other vascular features have been shown to be associated with chronic kidney disease, even in people without diabetes.

# Added value of this study

We developed and validated a DLA to screen for chronic kidney disease non-invasively from retinal images, using data from a large population-based study, and externally validated the DLA in two independent datasets in Singapore and China. The DLA showed good performance with AUC of 0·911 in internal validation and 0·733 and 0·835 in external test sets. The performance of the image DLA in subgroups of participants with diabetes (AUC 0·889) and hypertension (0·889) were similar to that of the whole group.

# Implications of all the available evidence

This is the first study to link the retina and the kidney with an Artificial intelligence-based DLA and shows the potential of retinal images as a tool to detect and screen chronic kidney disease with good accuracy in the community. DLAs have the potential to be integrated into retinal cameras to serve as a complementary community-based or primary care-based model for chronic kidney disease screening, which is traditionally reliant only on serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate.

# Methods

The study was done in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and ethics approval was obtained from the SingHealth Institutional Review Board. Written informed consent was provided by all participants. We did a conventional development, validation, and external testing study on three DLAs (retinal images only, RF only, and combined retinal and RF hybrid) using retinal images and clinical data collected from three population-based studies. We developed and internally validated the DLAs using data from the Singapore Epidemiology of Eye Diseases (SEED) study, and externally tested the DLAs on two independent datasets: the Singapore Prospective Study Program (SP2) and the Beijing Eye Study (BES).

# Definition of chronic kidney disease cases and controls

We defined chronic kidney disease as an eGFR of less than 60 mL/min per 1·73 m² (corresponding to stage 3 and above) and controls as those with eGFR 60 mL/min per 1·73 m² or higher (corresponding to chronic kidney disease stage 0–2). eGFR was calculated from serum creatinine using the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration equation. In the development SEED dataset, we assessed presence and absence of chronic kidney disease in both visits. Cases were those who had chronic kidney disease in either visit but without overlaps. If a participant had chronic kidney disease in one of the visits, images from the corresponding visit were used, and for participants with chronic kidney disease in both visits, only images from baseline were used for development. Controls were defined as those who had no chronic kidney disease in both visits (6191 participants). For all controls, images from baseline were used. Combining both visits, 2027 participants (1217 from SEED-1 and 810 from SEED-2) had chronic kidney disease. From this pool of cases and controls, after excluding those with missing or poor quality images, missing data on.

See Online for appendix study have been published.

# Articles

|Inputs|Block 1|Block 2|Block 3|Block 4|Block 5|Output|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|cAdd1|cAddj+1|cAddi+1|cAddk+1|cAddm+1| | |
|cAdd2|cAddj+2|cAddi+2|cAddk+2|cAddm+2| | |
| |Convolutional unit|Transition unit|Transition unit|Transition unit|Transition unit|Fully connected unit|
| |cAddj|cAddi|cAddk|cAddm|cAddN|Chronic kidney disease status|

Figure 1: Convolutional neural network architecture for chronic kidney disease from retinal images

The input was a concatenation of two normalised cropped retinal images, one macular-centred image per eye, and the output was a fully connected layer with the predicted chronic kidney disease status. The architecture comprises of 5 dense blocks alternated with transition layers to down-sample the features. Each dense block is a series of cAdd units, which is a new propagation mechanism of deepening and widening the neural architecture with two types of convolutions (1 × 1 and 3 × 3). Every transition layer is a 1 × 1 convolution with pooling. cAdd=channel-wise-addition.

Classic RF, and overlapping cases, data or images from SEED training set, SEED validation, SP2 validation, BES validation

| | | |SEED training set|SEED validation|SP2 validation|BES validation| | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | |Number of images|10,376|2,594|7,470|3,076| | | | | |
| | |Case:control|974:4214|244:1053|240:3495|53:1485| | | | | |
| | | | | | |Chronic kidney disease|Stage 3|881 (SD 90.5)|219 (SD 89.8)|225 (SD 93.8)|52 (SD 98.1)|
| | |Stage 4|66 (SD 6.7)|15 (SD 6.1)|12 (SD 5.0)|1 (SD 1.9)| | | | | |
| | |Stage 5|27 (SD 2.8)|10 (SD 4.1)|3 (SD 1.3)|0| | | | | |
| | |Age (years)|58.4 (SD 9.9)|58.4 (SD 9.9)|49.9 (SD 11.5)|64.3 (SD 9.6)| | | | | |
| | |Female|2446 (47.1%)|631 (48.7%)|1942 (52.0%)|902 (58.6%)| | | | | |
| | |Male|2742 (52.9%)|666 (51.3%)|1793 (48.0%)|636 (41.4%)| | | | | |
| | |Ethnicity|Chinese, Malay, Indian|Chinese, Malay, Indian|Chinese, Malay, Indian|Chinese| | | | | |
| | |Diabetes| | | | | | | | | |
| | |Hypertension|1486 (28.6%)|415 (32.0%)|367 (9.8)|259 (16.8)| | | | | |
|eGFR (mL/min per 1.73 m²)|3242 (62.5%)|824 (63.5%)|1518 (40.6)|785 (51.0)| | | | | | | |

Data are n (%) or mean (SD). SEED=Singapore Epidemiology of Eye Diseases. SP2=Singapore Prospective Study Program. BES=Beijing Eye Study. eGFR=estimated glomerular filtration rate.

We used five classic RF (age, sex, ethnicity, diabetes and hypertension) as predictors for the RF model. Age, sex, and ethnicity were self-reported and information on diabetes and hypertension were obtained from self-report, physical examination, and laboratory examination in all datasets (appendix p 1).

The output for the DLA was a binary classifier with two nodes classifying the presence or absence of chronic kidney disease status. The deep learning model is based on cCondenseNet with 5 blocks, as shown in figure 1.

During the training process, the parameters of the network are initially set to random values. For each image, the prediction given by the neural network is compared with its ground truth label, and parameters are updated to reduce the prediction error. We used the 5-fold cross-validation approach to evaluate the performance of the model by dividing the whole SEED dataset into 5 parts preserving the proportion of chronic kidney disease cases and controls as the original dataset. Each time, one part was held out for validation and the remaining 4 parts (80%) were used for developing the model. The validation set had no overlap with the training set. The performance of the trained DLA was evaluated on the validation set to classify chronic kidney disease status by averaging the AUCs across the 5 test samples.

# Articles

# Figure 2: RoC curves for prediction of chronic kidney disease in image-only, risk factors, and hybrid models

(A) Image-only model. AUC 0·911 in SEED, 0·733 in SP2, and 0·835 in BES. (B) Risk factors model. AUC 0·916 in SEED, 0·829 in SP2, and 0·887 in BES. (C) Hybrid model. AUC 0·938 in SEED, 0·810 in SP2, and 0·858 in BES. p values comparing AUC between image-only and hybrid model were 0·001 (SEED), 0·0005 (SP2), and 0·0002 (BES). RoC=receiver operating characteristic. AUC=area under the curve. SEED=Singapore Epidemiology of Eye Diseases. SP2=Singapore Prospective Study Program. BES=Beijing Eye Study.

| |AUC (95% CI)|Sensitivity|Specificity|PPV|NPV| | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|SEED test| | | | | | | | |
|Image-only|0·911 (0·886–0·936)|0·83|0·83|0·54|0·96| | | |
|RF only|0·916 (0·891–0·941)|0·82|0·84|0·54|0·95| | | |
|Hybrid|0·938 (0·917–0·959)|0·84|0·85|0·57|0·96| | | |
| | | | |SP2| | | | |
|Image-only|0·733 (0·696–0·770)|0·70|0·70|0·14|0·97| | | |
|RF only|0·829 (0·797–0·861)|0·73|0·80|0·20|0·98| | | |
|Hybrid|0·810 (0·776–0·844)|0·74|0·75|0·16|0·98| | | |
| | | | |BES| | | | |
|Image-only|0·835 (0·767–0·903)|0·75|0·75|0·09|0·99| | | |
|RF only|0·887 (0·828–0·946)|0·79|0·82|0·14|0·99| | | |
|Hybrid|0·858 (0·794–0·922)|0·79|0·79|0·11|0·99| | | |

AUC=Area under the curve. BES=Beijing Eye Study. NPV=negative predictive value. PPV=positive predictive value. RF=risk factors. SEED=Singapore Epidemiology of Eye Diseases. SP2=Singapore Prospective Study Program.

# Table 2: Performance of the deep learning algorithm in internal and external test sets

# Statistical analysis

We developed 3 different DLA models: 1) retinal image DLA 2) RF DLA (age, sex, ethnicity, diabetes, hypertension status) and 3) retinal image and RF (hybrid) DLA. The performance of the 3 models were evaluated in the internal validation set (SEED) and the external test sets using AUC. We measured sensitivity and specificity at an optimal threshold balancing the two measures and calculated positive predictive value and negative predictive value. To identify the most important regions in an image with respect to the classification (ie, how the DLA arrived at prediction), we generated heatmaps.

We performed sensitivity analyses to test the robustness of the algorithm. First, since misclassification of chronic kidney disease would be common among those with eGFR near to normal range (ie, 55–60 mL/min per 1·73 m²), we tested the DLA using an alternate definition of chronic kidney disease (eGFR <45 mL/min per 1·73 m²). Secondly, since the DLA was developed using a general population cohort (SEED), we tested the DLA in high-risk subgroups, including those with diabetes and hypertension, separately. For this analysis, we used only the SEED validation set since few patients in SP2 and BES had diabetes and chronic kidney disease or hypertension and chronic kidney disease. We also did two supplementary analyses. First we repeated our imaging DLAs using pre-set high sensitivity (95%) and pre-set high specificity (95%). Secondly, in addition to AUC, we estimated area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC), an alternative metric suggested for class imbalance data. Similar to AUC, AUPRC values range from 0 to 1, but while a value of 0·5 indicates a random guess for AUC, AUPRC is dependent on prevalence, and tends to be 0 when the prevalence is low.

# Role of the funding source

The funders had no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, preparation of the manuscript, and decision to publish. The corresponding author had full access to all data and final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

# Results

Participant characteristics are shown in table 1. Characteristics of the participants in the SEED training and validation sets were similar, except for a higher prevalence of diabetes in the validation set (415 [32·0%] of 1297 participants) versus training set (1486 [28·6%] of 5188 participants). Participants in BES were older (64·3 years [SD 9·6]) than those in SEED (58·4 years [SD 9·9]) and SP2 (49·9 years [SD 11·5]). Prevalence of diabetes and hypertension were higher and mean eGFRs were lower in SEED participants than in SP2 and BES participants. Most cases in all 3 datasets (90–98%) were e298 www.thelancet.com/digital-health Vol 2 June 2020

# Articles

stage 3 (eGFR 60–30 mL/min per 1·73 m²). 4·1% of cases in SEED, 1·3% in SP2, and no cases in BES were stage 5 (eGFR <15 mL/min per 1·73 m²).

AUC of the DLAs for image-only, RF, and the hybrid model are shown in figure 2. In SEED, AUC was 0·911 for image-only (95% CI 0·886–0·936), 0·916 for RF (0·891–0·941), and 0·938 for the hybrid model (0·917–0·959, p=0·001). AUC estimates were 0·733 in SP2 (0·696–0·770) and 0·835 in BES (0·767–0·903) for image-only, which improved to 0·829 in SP2 (0·797–0·861) and 0·887 in BES (0·828–0·946) for RF.

In the hybrid model, AUC was higher than image-only DLA in both SP2 (0·810 vs 0·733; p=0·0005) and BES (0·858 vs 0·835; p=0·0002). AUCs in the hybrid model were lower than that in the RF model in SP2 (0·810 vs 0·829) and BES (0·858 vs 0·887).

Performance metrics comparing the 3 models in internal validation and the external test sets are shown in table 2. In SEED, the DLA had 83% sensitivity and 83% specificity for image. Sensitivity and specificity were similar for RF and the hybrid model. In SP2, both sensitivity and specificity were 70% for image; 73% sensitivity, 80% specificity for RF; and 74% sensitivity, 75% specificity for the hybrid model. Sensitivity and specificity estimates in BES were 75% each for image; 79% sensitivity, 82% specificity for RF; and 79% each for the hybrid model. For image-only DLA, the negative predictive value was more than 95% in all three datasets across all 3 models. However, positive predictive value for image was very low in SP2 (14%) and BES (9%), compared with the SEED validation set (54%). Positive predictive value estimate for the hybrid model was 16% in SP2, 57% in SEED, and 11% in BES.

In sensitivity analyses, using an alternative definition of chronic kidney disease (defined as eGFR <45 ml/min), the performance of the DLA improved significantly for all models in all datasets (table 3). For image-only, AUC estimates improved from 0·911 to 0·933 in SEED validation, 0·733 to 0·827 in SP2, and 0·835 to 0·904 in BES. Performance of the DLA in subgroups of diabetes and hypertension in SEED validation were similar to the main model (AUC for diabetes was 0·889 for image, 0·899 for RF, and 0·925 for hybrid; AUC for hypertension was 0·889 for image, 0·889 for RF, and 0·918 for hybrid).

In pre-set high sensitivity (95%) analyses, the negative predictive value for image was high in all three datasets (98% in SEED and SP2 and approximately 100% in BES). In pre-set high specificity analyses, positive predictive value increased from 54% to 76% in SEED, 14% to 22% in SP2, and 9% to 20% in BES. Estimated AUPRC for image-only for SEED validation was good (0·793, 95% CI 0·758–0·828) but, as expected, it was lower for SP2 (0·167, 0·147–0·187) and BES (0·140, 0·105–0·175; data not shown).

In heatmaps (figure 3), changes related to dilatation of venules, rarefaction of vessels, and retinopathy changes were noted in DLA positive cases (figure 3C–E), suggesting that the signals for the prediction could be distributed throughout the image.

BES=Beijing Eye Study. eGFR=estimated glomerular filtration rate. SEED=Singapore Epidemiology of Eye Diseases. SP2=Singapore Prospective Study Program.

# Articles

# Discussion

Few risk prediction models have been developed for screening chronic kidney disease. Most have been based on traditional risk factors, except for one model based on deep learning, using ultrasound images of kidney to predict chronic kidney disease. The Screening for Occult Renal Disease model developed using data from the US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (1999–02), and externally validated in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study population achieved an AUC of 0·88 and 0·71 in internal and external validation models. The model was developed based on several clinical variables associated with chronic kidney disease like diabetes, hypertension, anaemia, history of cardiovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, congestive cardiac failure, and proteinuria. A point-of-care screening model developed in India using age, sex, waist circumference, body-mass index, and urine dipstick achieved a C-statistic of 0·76 in internal validation and 0·74 and 0·70 in external test sets. The deep learning model based on kidney ultrasonography developed in Taiwan achieved an AUC of 0·904 with 92·1% specificity but only 60·7% sensitivity, and lacked external validation. In our study, prediction based on retinal image alone performed very well in internal validation and had reasonable performance in the external test sets.

While the negative predictive value of image-only DLA was more than 95% in all datasets, the positive predictive value was high in SEED validation, but low in SP2 and BES, because positive predictive value is influenced by the prevalence of chronic kidney disease in the population. Prevalence of chronic kidney disease in SEED was high (baseline prevalence was 12%), and we combined cases from two visits to balance cases and controls. Thus, proportion of chronic kidney disease cases in the SEED validation set was 23%. Prevalence of chronic kidney disease in SP2 and BES was low, resulting in low positive predictive value. To increase positive predictive value in populations with low prevalence of chronic kidney disease, we recommend the image-only DLA be applied to at-risk groups, such as people with diabetes or hypertension. The current image-only DLA showed good performance in SEED because of the high prevalence of hypertension, diabetes, and the age of participants.

Positive predictive value could also be improved by choosing a high-specificity operating threshold. For the current image-only DLA, we chose a threshold that had optimal sensitivity and specificity (both >80%). If we choose a 95% specificity cutoff, positive predictive value improved in all 3 datasets. Depending upon the needs of the health-care system, different operating thresholds can be chosen. Since the retinal image-based DLA has similar performance to that of classic RF models, we also suggest applying this tool as part of a two-stage or sequential screening as used in diabetes screening where fasting blood glucose is used to screen first followed by oral glucose tolerance. Being non-invasive, image-only DLA complements chronic kidney disease screening in different clinical and public health settings.

# Articles

can be applied first and those who screen positive are recalled for further testing with serum creatinine, reducing the number of false positives.

To overcome the limitations of class imbalance, alternative metrics such as kappa statistic and AUPRC have been suggested over accuracy and AUC. Kappa, a traditional measure of agreement between two raters (inter-rater agreement) has widely been used as a classification performance metric in machine learning literature. In unbalanced situations, distribution of misclassification has been shown to affect the value of kappa to the extent that worse classification results can occur despite high values of kappa, and Delgado and colleagues²⁸ discouraged using kappa as a performance measure comparing classifiers. In low-prevalence settings, AUPRC has been suggested to overcome the optimism of ROC,²⁹ thus reporting AUPRC as a supplement to AUC is recommended. PRC focuses on positive predictive value (precision) and sensitivity (recall) but completely ignores true negatives, which is the dominant group in low-prevalence disease. In our study, AUC and PRC performance were quite good in SEED validation, but AUC performance was modest, with a low positive predictive value and a low PRC (&lt;0·2) in both SP2 and BES.

A crucial element of any AI-based prediction tool is its clinical relevance. In clinical practice, when chronic kidney disease screening is recommended by physicians, blood or urine is taken on the same or another day and the results are sent several hours later to the physician. The patient is scheduled to return another day, when the physician reviews the result with the patient. In addition, fear of needles is a common problem that affects around 10% of individuals and leads to avoidance of medical care.³⁰ Thus, despite the low cost and easy availability of serum creatinine testing, compliance to chronic kidney disease screening is low, even in high-income countries²³ and in people with diabetes.⁵

The retinal changes that the AI or DLA is picking up probably represent the cumulative effects of multiple shared pathways leading to chronic kidney disease, including microvascular damage resulting from age, diabetes, hypertension, and inflammation. The microvascular changes representing vessel dilatation, rarefaction, and retinopathy observed in heatmaps of DLA positive cases were consistent with similar quantitative findings reported previously. 9 Since the fundus image-based DLA has similar performance to that of classic RF model, it can be used as an alternative screening model. The use of fundus-image based technology will also improve with integration of the DLA into retinal cameras and even smartphones in the future to give rapid, non-invasive, and point-of-care diagnoses, which will help reduce demand on human resources involved in chronic kidney disease screening services and could improve compliance to screening. Retinal cameras are available in primary care settings for diabetic retinopathy screening.

# Contributors

CS and TYW had full access to all of the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. CS, MLL, WH and TYW conceived and designed the study. DX, SN and CS analysed the data. CS and RB drafted the manuscript. DX, DSWT, SN, HH, CL, Y-CT, CYC, EST, YXW, JBJ, C-YC, MLL, WH, and TYW critically revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. Final version of the paper has been seen and approved by all the authors.

# Declaration of interests

TYW reports Consultancy and payments for lectures from Allergan, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ðenentech, Merck, Novartis, Oxurion.

www.thelancet.com/digital-health Vol 2 June 2020 e301

# Articles

Roche and Samsung, outside the submitted work. All other authors declare no competing interests.

# Data sharing

As the study involves human participants, the data cannot be made freely available in the manuscript, the appendix, or a public repository because of ethical restrictions. Nevertheless, the data are available from the Singapore Eye Research Institutional Ethics Committee for researchers who meet the criteria for access to confidential data.

Interested researchers can send data access requests to the Singapore Eye Research Institute at seri@seri.com.sg.

# Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the National Medical Research Council, OFLCG/001/2017, NMRC/STaR/003/2008, NMRC/0796/2003, NMRC/1249/2010, NMRC/STaR/0016/2013 and NMRC/CIRG/1417/2015. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

# References

1. Fox CS, Matsushita K, Woodward M, et al. Associations of kidney disease measures with mortality and end-stage renal disease in individuals with and without diabetes: a meta-analysis. Lancet 2012; 380: 1662–73.
2. Ene-Iordache B, Perico N, Bikbov B, et al. Chronic kidney disease and cardiovascular risk in six regions of the world (ISN-KDDC): a cross-sectional study. Lancet Glob Health 2016; 4: e307–19.
3. Berns JS. Routine screening for CKD should be done in asymptomatic adults...selectively. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2014; 9: 1988–92.
4. Qaseem A, Hopkins RH, Sweet DE, et al. Screening, monitoring, and treatment of stage 1 to 3 chronic kidney disease: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2013; 159: 835–47.
5. Manski-Nankervis JE, Thuraisingam S, Lau P, et al. Screening and diagnosis of chronic kidney disease in people with type 2 diabetes attending Australian general practice. Aust J Prim Health 2018; 24: 280–86.
6. Reutens AT. Epidemiology of diabetic kidney disease. Med Clin North Am 2013; 97: 1–18.
7. Wong CW, Wong TY, Cheng CY, Sabanayagam C. Kidney and eye diseases: common risk factors, etiological mechanisms, and pathways. Kidney Int 2014; 85: 1290–302.
8. Lim LS, Cheung CY, Sabanayagam C, et al. Structural changes in the retinal microvasculature and renal function. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2013; 54: 2970–76.
9. Sabanayagam C, Shankar A, Koh D, et al. Retinal microvascular caliber and chronic kidney disease in an Asian population. Am J Epidemiol 2008; 169: 625–32.
10. Gulshan V, Peng L, Coram M, et al. Development and validation of a deep learning algorithm for detection of diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs. JAMA 2016; 316: 2402–10.
11. Ting DSW, Cheung CY, Lim G, et al. Development and validation of a deep learning system for diabetic retinopathy and related eye diseases using retinal images from multiethnic populations with diabetes. JAMA 2017; 318: 2211–23.
12. Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA, et al. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature 2017; 542: 115–18.
13. Kuo CC, Chang CM, Liu KT, et al. Automation of the kidney function prediction and classification through ultrasound-based kidney imaging using deep learning. NPJ Digit Med 2019; 2: 29.
14. Foong AW, Saw SM, Loo JL, et al. Rationale and methodology for a population-based study of eye diseases in Malay people: the Singapore Malay eye study (SiMES). Ophthalmic Epidemiol 2007; 14: 25–35.
15. Lavanya R, Jeganathan VS, Zheng Y, et al. Methodology of the Singapore Indian Chinese Cohort (SICC) eye study: quantifying ethnic variations in the epidemiology of eye diseases in Asians. Ophthalmic Epidemiol 2009; 16: 325–36.
16. Sabanayagam C, Yip W, Gupta P, et al. Singapore Indian Eye Study-2: methodology and impact of migration on systemic and eye outcomes. Clin Exp Ophthalmol 2017; 45: 779–89.
17. Sabanayagam C, Tai ES, Shankar A, Lee J, Sun C, Wong TY. Retinal arteriolar narrowing increases the likelihood of chronic kidney disease in hypertension. J Hypertens 2009; 27: 2209–17.
18. Xu J, Xu L, Wang YX, You QS, Jonas JB, Wei WB. Ten-year cumulative incidence of diabetic retinopathy. The Beijing Eye Study 2001/2011. PLoS One 2014; 9: e111320.
19. Levey AS, Stevens LA, Schmid CH, et al. A new equation to estimate glomerular filtration rate. Ann Intern Med 2009; 150: 604–12.
20. Xu D, Lee ML, Wynne Hsu. Propagation mechanism for deep and wide neural networks. 30th IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR); Long Beach, CA, USA; June 16–20, 2019; 9212–20.
21. Saunders MR, Cifu A, Vela M. Screening for chronic kidney disease. JAMA 2015; 314: 615–16.
22. Mitka M. Nephrologists question ACP’s kidney disease guidelines. JAMA 2013; 310: 2387–88.
23. National Kidney Foundation. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for chronic kidney disease: evaluation, classification, and stratification. Am J Kidney Dis 2002; 39 (2 suppl 1): S1–266.
24. Hallan SI, Dahl K, Oien CM, et al. Screening strategies for chronic kidney disease in the general population: follow-up of cross-sectional health survey. BMJ 2006; 333: 1047.
25. Komenda P, Ferguson TW, Macdonald K, et al. Cost-effectiveness of primary screening for CKD: a systematic review. Am J Kidney Dis 2014; 63: 789–97.
26. Bang H, Vupputuri S, Shoham DA, et al. SCreening for Occult REnal Disease (SCORED): a simple prediction model for chronic kidney disease. Arch Intern Med 2007; 167: 374–81.
27. Bradshaw C, Kondal D, Montez-Rath ME, et al. Early detection of chronic kidney disease in low-income and middle-income countries: development and validation of a point-of-care screening strategy for India. BMJ Glob Health 2019; 4: e001644.
28. Delgado R, Tibau XA. Why Cohen’s Kappa should be avoided as performance measure in classification. PLoS One 2019; 14: e0222916.
29. Ozenne B, Subtil F, Maucort-Boulch D. The precision–recall curve overcame the optimism of the receiver operating characteristic curve in rare diseases. J Clin Epidemiol 2015; 68: 855–59.
30. Deacon B, Abramowitz J. Fear of needles and vasovagal reactions among phlebotomy patients. J Anxiety Disord 2006; 20: 946–60.

