# Reference-Dependence in Multi-Location Newsvendor Models: A Structural Analysis

# Teck-Hua Ho, Noah Lim, and Tony Haitao Cui¹

# Forthcoming, Management Science

¹All authors contributed equally. Direct correspondence to any of the authors. Ho: Haas School of Business, University of California at Berkeley, Lim: Wisconsin School of Business, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Cui: Carlson School of Management, University of Minnesota. We thank seminar participants at the Pennsylvania State University, ISyE of the University of Minnesota, Tsinghua University, and the 2007 INFORMS Annual Meeting for their helpful comments. Taizan Chan developed the software system for running the experiments. Hua Chen, Carmen Liutec and Paola Mallucci provided superb research assistance. Tony Haitao Cui gratefully acknowledges the financial support from the 3M Non-Tenured Faculty Grant.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Reference-Dependence in Multi-Location Newsvendor Models: A Structural Analysis

# Abstract

We propose a behavioral theory to predict actual ordering behavior in multi-location inventory systems. The theory rests on a well-known stylized fact of human behavior: People’s preferences are reference-dependent. We incorporate reference-dependence into the newsvendor framework by assuming that there are psychological costs of leftovers and stock outs. We also hypothesize that the psychological aversion to leftovers is greater than the disutility for stock outs. We then experimentally test the proposed theory in both the centralized and decentralized inventory structures using subjects motivated by substantial financial incentives. Consistent with the proposed theory, actual orders exhibit the so-called pull-to-center bias and the degree of bias is greater in the high-profit margin than in the low-profit margin condition. These systematic biases are shown to eliminate the risk pooling benefit when the demands across store locations are strongly correlated. Since the proposed model nests the standard inventory and ex-post inventory error minimization theories as special cases, one can systematically evaluate the predictive power of each alternative using the generalized likelihood principle. We structurally estimate all three theories using the experimental data and the estimation results strongly suggest that the proposed behavioral theory captures actual orders and profits better. We also conduct two experiments to validate the behavioral model by manipulating the relative salience of the psychological costs of leftovers versus that of stock outs to alleviate the pull-to-center bias.

Keywords: Multi-location Inventory System, Newsvendor; Behavioral Operations Management; Experimental Economics

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# 1 Introduction

One of the most striking empirical findings in operations management research is that decision-makers appear to have great difficulty arriving at the optimal order prescribed by standard inventory theory, even in the simplest setting of a single-store newsvendor. This finding was first reported by Schweitzer and Cachon (2000), who used laboratory economic experiments to study how subjects with managerial experience make ordering decisions for a single-store newsvendor. They documented a ‘pull-to-center’ bias, that is, relative to the optimal order, subjects over-order when the ordering cost is high and under-order when the ordering cost is low. Bolton and Katok (2008) and Bostian, Holt and Smith (2008) conducted follow-up experiments and showed that the pull-to-center bias is robust to changes in the features of the experimental design such as increasing the monetary payoffs, increasing the number of decision rounds, simplifying the decision space and providing summary statistics of past demands.

If managers are in charge of multiple store locations, as is often the case in practice, then their ordering decisions are even more complex. In the multi-location setting, they not only have to take into account multiple store demands which may be correlated, but also consider the question of whether to centralize the inventory structure. Standard inventory theory prescribes a centralized inventory structure over a decentralized one as long as demands across the locations are not perfectly correlated. This is due to the benefit of risk pooling (Eppen 1979). However, the ability of a firm to fully realize this benefit has not been empirically verified. Moreover, the standard analysis that generates the risk pooling benefit assumes that managers who make the ordering decisions are perfectly rational and will not exhibit systematic biases. As mentioned above, this perfect rationality assumption has been challenged by recent empirical findings that ordering decisions are biased in the setting of a single-store newsvendor problem. Given these findings, one would expect that orders in the multi-store setting would also not conform to the theoretical prediction. One potential implication is that firms may not realize the full benefits of risk pooling due to the biases in order quantities. In this paper, we test whether the same kind of pull-to-center bias exists.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

in a multi-location newsvendor setting. Schweitzer and Cachon (2000) showed that if a manager has a preference for minimizing ex-post inventory error, then she will exhibit the pull-to-center bias. The authors however did not estimate their behavioral model using the experimental data. In this paper, we propose a new behavioral model that rests on a well-known empirical fact about human beings: People’s preferences are reference-dependent (Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Thaler 1985; K˝ oszegi and Rabin 2006, and Ho, Lim and Camerer 2006a, 2006b). We incorporate reference-dependence into the newsvendor framework by assuming that there are psychological costs of leftovers and stock outs. We also hypothesize that the psychological aversion to leftovers is greater than the disutility for stock outs. Our model nests the perfect rationality hypothesis and Schweitzer and Cachon’s model as special cases. These direct relationships allow us to structurally estimate all three models simultaneously using our experimental data. In this way, we provide a deeper understanding of the behavioral underpinnings for the pull-to-center bias.

This paper contributes to the emerging field of behavioral operations management in 4 ways:

1. Develop a new behavioral theory of a multi-location inventory system. Our model assumes that in addition to the standard pecuniary costs of having leftovers and not meeting demand, decision-makers also experience psychological disutility from having leftovers and stock outs. We allow these two components of disutility to be weighted differently because prior research suggests that the psychological disutility from losses that are actually incurred (for the case of leftovers) are stronger than forgone losses (for the case of stock outs). We prove that when decision-makers exhibit reference-dependence, the model predicts a pull-to-center bias in both the centralized and decentralized inventory structures. We also show that when the psychological cost of a leftover is higher than that of a stock out, the pull-to-center bias is stronger in the high-profit margin relative to the low-profit margin condition. We derive closed-form solutions for the order quantities given the behavioral biases.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# 2. Design and conduct the first experiment to examine orders and profit outcomes of the multi-location newsvendor across the centralized and decentralized inventory structures.

We also vary the levels of the product profit margin (low or high, which we term the low-profit and high-profit conditions). Thus, our main experiment consists of four separate treatments. Within each treatment, we also test the robustness of the theory predictions using two different scenarios of demand correlations among store locations - one where demands are uncorrelated versus one where they exhibit strong positive correlations (with respective correlation coefficients of 0 and 0.8). The data show that the pattern of orders across all treatments is consistent with the predictions of the generalized newsvendor model, with pull-to-center biases in all four treatments and a stronger bias in the high-profit conditions. Consequently, the actual average profits are lower than predicted by the standard inventory model. We also find that when the demands across stores are uncorrelated, actual profits under centralization are indeed higher relative to decentralization, so the risk pooling benefit survives the pull-to-center in orders. However, when the demands are strongly correlated, we did not find statistical support for the risk pooling benefit.

# 3. Structurally estimate the proposed behavioral model using the experimental data and show that the model tracks actual orders more closely than the standard inventory model and Schweitzer and Cachon’s model.

The parameter estimates indicate that the psychological cost of a leftover is 1.53 times greater than the psychological cost of a stock out, which also explains the stronger pull-to-center bias in the high-profit conditions. The approach of structural estimation is rare in the behavioral operations management literature and our paper is one of the first to estimate the behavioral parameters of a model with psychological biases.2

# 4. Validate the new behavioral theory using two follow-up experiments.

The key idea

2The other exceptions are Su (2008), who estimated the error parameter in a model where decision-makers are allowed to make computational errors and Bostian, Holt and Smith (2008), who estimated the parameters of a learning model (Camerer and Ho 1999) that tracks how people adjust orders over multiple decision rounds.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

behind these experiments is to attempt to manipulate the relative salience of the psychological cost of a leftover versus the psychological cost of a stock out, such that the pull-to-center bias is predicted to be reduced if the psychological drivers of the behavioral model are indeed operational. Which one of the two psychological costs we make salient to subjects depends on whether it is the low-profit or high-profit condition (so that we know the direction in which to move the ordering decisions). In the first experiment, we asked subjects to compute and write down the costs of leftovers (unmet demands) in the low-profit (high-profit) condition in every round if these costs are incurred in that round. In the second experiment, we introduced a small monetary penalty (bonus) for having leftovers (for meeting all customer demand) in the low-profit (high-profit) conditions. The results of both experiments show that the pull-to-center bias is alleviated in aggregate and for most individual subjects. These validation tests further support the reference-dependence theory.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces the reference-dependence model for the multi-location newsvendor. We contrast the predictions of this model with those of the standard inventory model using three propositions. Section 3 describes the design and results of the main experiment, the structural estimation of the reference-dependence model, and shows that the generalized behavioral model provides a superior explanation of the actual pattern of orders and profits. Section 4 presents the two experiments designed to validate our behavioral model. We offer some concluding remarks in Section 5.

# 2 Reference-Dependence in the Multi-Location Newsvendor

A newsvendor is in charge of n retail stores that sell an identical product. Each store has a demand (in units), denoted Di for store i = 1, ..., n. The demands across the stores are identically distributed following a normal distribution F(·) ∼ N(μ, σ²) and the correlation between any two stores is given by ρ (− 1 ≤ ρ ≤ 1). The newsvendor’s decision is to order

n−1

4

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

The products before the selling cycle begins in order to maximize expected profit. The unit retail price is p, the unit cost is c and s is the unit salvage value of unsold units. The price and unit cost are exogenously determined and independent of the sales volume.

If this multi-location newsvendor faces a decentralized inventory structure, then orders are specific to each store, so it orders qi for store i = 1, ..., n. Since the retail price p and unit cost c are constant across all stores, the newsvendor will order the same quantity qi = qd for each of the n stores. The aggregate ordering quantity across stores is Qd = n · qd. The newsvendor’s total profit under decentralization is Πd = n · [p · ∑i=1n min[qd, Di] − c · qd].

If the inventory is centralized however, that is, the product units that are ordered can be freely allocated across the n stores after the demand realizations, the newsvendor determines an aggregate ordering quantity Qc. Since demands across stores are identically distributed with a correlation ρ, if F(·) has a mean of μ and a variance of σ², then the total demand distribution under centralization, G(·), has a mean of n·μ and a variance of [n+n(n−1)ρ]·σ². The newsvendor’s total profit in this case is given by Πc = p · min[Qc, ∑i=1n Di] − c · Qc.

Under both centralization and decentralization, the goal of the newsvendor is to maximize its expected profit EΠ(·) given the corresponding demand distribution, which is F(·) under decentralization and G(·) under centralization. It is customary to attack each of the profit maximization problems by solving an equivalent optimization problem that minimizes the corresponding expected costs. In the newsvendor context, there are two types of costs - the costs of over-ordering (from having leftovers) and the costs of under-ordering (from having stock outs). Under standard inventory theory, the manager arrives at the optimal ordering decision through minimizing the sum of these two types of costs.

However, there is a large stream of research that has shown that people make decisions not only based on their final pecuniary outcomes, but also based on changes in outcomes relative to a reference point (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Reference-dependent preferences have been used to explain a broad range of behavioral ‘anomalies’ such as why cab drivers do not work longer hours on days when customers are plentiful (they have a target income level and stop working beyond that target), why contestants increase effort in contests with

5 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

more winners than losers (losing hurts more when contestants are now expected to win), and why sellers overprice their houses in a real estate bust (they try to avoid making a loss relative to their purchase price).3 In the newsvendor model, the manager knows that he will be confronted by the demand realizations after the ordering decision, and that the losses from over-ordering or under-ordering will be computed based on the actual demands. Hence, these realized demands serve as natural focal points by which the manager evaluates the effectiveness of his ordering decision. Besides the pecuniary costs of having leftovers or stockouts, the manager may also experience additional psychological disutility because the firm’s losses resulted from his ordering decision. Moreover, the degree of psychological pain may differ depending on whether the losses are actual losses (from having leftovers) or forgone losses (from having stock outs). Prior research has shown that decision-makers underweight or even neglect forgone payoffs, both in individual decision-making tasks (Thaler 1980; Frederick et. al 2009) and in strategic situations (Camerer and Ho 1999). Applying this finding to the newsvendor model, one could posit that the psychological pain from having a leftover may be greater than that from having a stock out.

In this paper, we capture reference-dependence in the newsvendor setting by applying the modeling framework of Thaler (1985) and K˝ oszegi and Rabin (2006) and specifying preferences as the sum of two components: An intrinsic utility component associated with the actual final outcome, and a change utility component associated with gains and losses relative to a reference point.4 Specifically, we assume that each of the two types of costs faced by the decision-maker in the newsvendor problem consists of two components - an actual cost component and a psychological cost component that depends on a reference point. For the psychological cost component of utility, we use the realized demands as the reference points because as mentioned above, they are the most critical and salient pieces of information the decision-maker expects to receive after making the ordering decision.

3See Camerer et. al 1997; Lim 2010; Genesove and Mayer 2001 respectively for details of these examples. See also Ho, Lim and Camerer (2006a) for other applications of reference-dependence.

4Thaler (1985) proposed in the context of consumer choice that a consumer’s overall utility from a purchase is composed of ‘acquisition utility’, which is the consumer surplus in standard economic models, and also ‘transaction utility’, which is the perceived value of the deal relative to some reference price.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

we assume that there will be no psychological disutility only when orders are equal to the realized demands, that is, when there are zero overage and underage costs.5 Formally, the expected utility EU (Q) as a function of the ordering quantity Q (Q = Qᵈ = qᵈ under decentralization or Qᶜ under centralization)6 for a decision maker with reference-dependent preferences facing a demand distribution with p.d.f. h(x) is given by:

EU(Qᵣ) = ∫0Qr [p x + s(Qr − x) − δo(Qr − x)] · h(x)dx + ∫Qr∞ [p Qᵣ − δu · (x − Qᵣ)] · h(x)dx − c Qᵣ (2.1)

where δₒ ≥ 0 is the psychological per-unit cost of over-ordering for Qᵣ > D, δu ≥ 0 is the psychological per-unit cost of under-ordering for Qᵣ ≤ D, and H(·) is the focal distribution of demand that the newsvendor uses to make orders, that is, H(·) = G(·) under centralization and H(·) = F(·) under decentralization. If the decision-maker underweights forgone payoffs as suggested by previous research, we have δₒ > δu. Note that when δₒ = δu = 0, there is no reference-dependence and equation (2.1) reduces to the standard inventory model.

With the usual notations, we have underage cost cu = (p−c) and overage cost cₒ = (c−s). The normal distribution is symmetric, so that F(μ) = 1 in the decentralized scenario and G(n· μ) = 1 under centralization where μ is the expected demand at each store. The decision maker maximizes expected utility, and the optimal order quantity with reference-dependent preferences can be solved through the F.O.C. of equation (2.1) and is given by:

H(Q*) = P(X ≤ Q*) = cu + δu = p − c + δu = c.r. (2.2)

where c.r. is the so-called critical ratio.

Note that if we restrict the behavioral model by assuming that when people make actual ordering decisions, they care only about minimizing actual costs and will not be influenced by reference-dependence (i.e., δₒ = δu = 0), we recover the standard inventory model with

5Ho, Camerer and Chong (2007) also show that using the best-payoff scenario ex-post as the reference point by which decision-makers evaluate their outcomes predicts learning behavior in strategic situations well.

6Here EU(Qr) is equal to the sum of EΠ(Qr) and the psychological cost of over-ordering for Qr > D or under-ordering for Qr < D, where EΠ(Qr) is the per-store expected profit under decentralization and the total expected profit under centralization.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

the optimal order quantity Q∗ given by the familiar expression of:

H(Q∗) = P (X ≤ Q∗) = c     cu    = p − c                       (2.3)

u + co    p − s

We denote Qc∗ as the optimal total order under centralization and qd∗ as the optimal order per store under decentralization in the standard inventory model.

# Optimal Orders

Under decentralization, the optimal order for each store is:

qd∗ = μ + Zcr, r · σ                                      (2.4)

where Zcr, r is the inverse of the cumulative normal density evaluated at the critical ratio p−c+δu of the behavioral model in equation (2.2). The total order for the n stores is simply equal to

Qd∗ = n · qd∗ = n · μ + n · Zcr, r · σ                            (2.5)

r        r

Under centralization, orders are given by

Qc∗  =   μᶜ + Zcr, r · σᶜ = n · μ + Zcr, r · σ√n + n(n − 1)ρ               (2.6)

where again Zcr, r is the inverse of the cumulative normal density evaluated at the critical ratio p−c+δu of the behavioral model in equation (2.2). Furthermore, we need to have n + n(n − 1)ρ ≥ 0 in order to have σᶜ as a real number, which leads to −   1  ≤ ρ ≤ 1.

Proposition 1 below shows that incorporating psychological costs due to reference-dependence can account for pull-to-center effects in orders. Also, following Schweitzer and Cachon (2000), we define the profit condition faced by the newsvendor to be a high-profit condition when c.r. ≥  1 and a low-profit condition otherwise under the assumption of δₒ = δu = 0. We assume constant price p and salvage value s, and denote the cost in the high-profit condition as cₕₚ and the cost in the low-profit condition as cₗₚ when we compare across profit conditions. We thus have cₗₚ > cₕₚ since the critical ratio in the high-profit condition is larger than that in the low-profit condition.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

Denote Ωᶜ = Qc∗ − Qc∗ and Ωᵈ = qd∗ − qd∗ to measure the degree of pull-to-center in

lp    r               lp    r

the low-profit condition and Ωᶜ = Qc∗ − Qc∗ and Ωᵈ = qᵈ∗ − qd∗ to measure the degree of

hp           r        hp          r

pull-to-center in the high-profit condition. The degrees of pull-to-center are therefore given

by

   c      lp     lp    √

 Ω   = (Z    − Z   )  · σ n + n(n − 1)ρ



   lp    cr,r    cr





 Ωd = (Zlp   − Zˡᵖ)   · σ

   lp    cr,r    cr     √                ,                      (2.7)

 Ωc   = (Zʰᵖ − Zʰᵖ ) · σ  n + n(n − 1)ρ

   hp     cr     cr,r



 Ωd   = (Zʰᵖ − Zʰᵖ ) · σ

hp     cr     cr,r

where Zˡᵖ, Zˡᵖ, Zʰᵖ, and Zʰᵖ are the inverses of the cumulative normal density evaluated

cr,r  cr  cr,r       cr

# Proposition 1

In the low-profit condition, orders exhibit pull-to-center, i.e., Ωᶜ > 0 and

Ωᵈ > 0, as long as

δu > p − cₗₚ ,                                    (2.8)

δₒ   cₗₚ + s

and in the high-profit condition, orders exhibit pull-to-center, i.e., Ωᶜ > 0 and Ωᵈ > 0, as

hp            hp

long as

δu < p − cₕₚ ,                                    (2.9)

δₒ   cₕₚ + s

for any δu ≥ 0, δₒ ≥ 0, and  cₗₚ > cₕₚ.

Proof. See Appendix A.⁷

Next, we show that if the psychological per-unit cost of over-ordering is larger than that

of under-ordering, that is, δₒ > δu, there will be an asymmetric pull-to-center effect when

we compare a low-profit condition with its symmetric high-profit condition. We define a

low-profit condition and a high-profit condition to be symmetric if the optimal orders in

both conditions have the same distance to the expected demand under the assumption of

δₒ = δu = 0.

7All the proofs that are not given in the main text of the paper can be found in Appendix A.

9

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Proposition 2

The pull-to-center effect is stronger in the high-profit condition relative to its symmetric low-profit condition, Ωᶜ > Ωᶜ and Ωᵈ > Ωᵈ, if and only if δₒ > δu > 0.

hp
lp
hp
lp
The above propositions show how orders will be biased if decision-makers indeed have reference-dependent preferences. The following proposition characterizes the implications on expected profits under reference-dependence.

# Proposition 3

The ordering quantity with reference-dependence biases leads to a lower profit than the optimal order in the standard model, and the profit difference is given by

EΠ(Qᶜ∗) − EΠ(Qc∗) = (c − s)(Qc∗ − Qᶜ∗)

r [ Qᶜ∗ − μH Qc∗ − μH ]

+(p − s)σH R( r σH ) − R( σH ) (2.10)

in the centralized inventory structure and

EΠ(qd∗) − EΠ(qd∗) = n(c − s)(qd∗ − qd∗)

r [ qᵈ∗ − μH qd∗ − μH ]

+n(p − s)σH R( r σH ) − R( σH ) (2.11)

in the decentralized inventory structure, where μH and σ² are the mean and variance of the focal demand with a distribution H(·) and R(τ) = ∫ ∞(y − τ )√¹ e−ʸ² dy.

τ 2π 2

It is important to mention at this point that one may generate a similar pull-to-center result in orders using alternative explanations. The most well-known of these is the model with preferences for minimizing ex-post inventory error by Schweitzer and Cachon (2000). We note that interestingly, while our model is based on different psychological underpinnings, it can be shown to be a mathematical generalization of their model for the special case of δₒ = δu = δ. To see this, let δu = δₒ = δ and re-write equation (2.1) as

EU(Qᵣ) = ∫0Qᵣ [p x + s(Qr − x)] · h(x)dx + ∫ ∞ p Qᵣ · h(x)dx − c Qᵣ

− ∫ Qʳ δ · (Q − x)h(x)dx − ∫ ∞ δ Qʳ

∫ Q0 r Qr ∫· (x − Qr)h(x)dx

= 0 r [p x + s(Qr − x)] · h(x)dx + ∞ p Qr · h(x)dx − c Qᵣ

− ∫₀∞ δ · |Qᵣ − x|h(x)dx Qr (2.12)

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

where − ∫∞ δ · |Qᵣ − x|h(x)dx represents the disutility of the ex-post inventory error with a per-unit psychological cost of δ. Note that an empirical implication of the model of Schweitzer and Cachon (2000) is that Proposition 2 will not hold, that is, the pull-to-center effect will be equally strong across symmetric low-profit and high-profit conditions.

To determine the relative efficacy of the predictions of the reference-dependence model versus its nested models, that is, the model of Schweitzer and Cachon (2000) and the standard inventory model, we conduct an incentive-aligned experiment to study how people make ordering decisions in a multi-location newsvendor setting. Based on our discussion of Propositions 1 to 3, the objectives of the experiment are to assess the following questions: First, is there a pull-to-center effect in the actual ordering decisions across both the centralized and decentralized inventory structures and also across the low-profit and high-profit conditions, consistent with the prediction of Proposition 1? Second, is there a stronger pull-to-center effect in the high-profit condition relative to the low-profit condition, consistent with the prediction of Proposition 2 when δₒ > δu? Third, are the actual profits lower than the levels predicted by the standard inventory model as predicted by Proposition 3? We describe the details of the experimental design and the results in the next section.

# 3 Experimental Test

# 3.1 Design and Procedure

To test if the predictions of the reference-dependence model are valid, we employ a 2 x 2 between-subjects experimental design that varies the type of inventory structure (Centralized or Decentralized) and the product profit condition (Low or High, through varying the unit cost c). We varied the inventory structure because we wanted to check if our model is robust across the two types of inventory structure that a multi-location newsvendor may face - a centralized or a decentralized one. We varied the profit condition because we wanted to test if the psychological costs of leftovers and stock outs are different through comparing the strength of the pull-to-center effect (if any) across the profit conditions. As an additional robustness check, we also implemented two different scenarios of demand correlations between

11 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

stores (ρ = 0 and ρ = 0.8) within each of these 4 treatments. Subjects were undergraduate business majors at a public research university in the United States and all of them had completed at least one statistics course at the undergraduate level. A total of S = 160 subjects were recruited, with 40 subjects assigned to each of the four treatment cells. Each subject made ordering decisions for 40 rounds. Two experimental sessions were conducted for each treatment, with each session corresponding to a different demand correlation scenario. Each session has 20 subjects and lasted approximately 75 minutes. Subjects received course credit for arriving on time and earned experimental points which were converted into cash at the end of the session. The average dollar earnings were 16.80 dollars, and the minimum and maximum earnings were 2.00 and 24 dollars respectively.

Once subjects entered the room, each of them was assigned an identification number (that runs from 1 to 20 in each session) and seated at a computer terminal. The instructions were then read aloud by the experimenter. Each subject was told that she was a manager in charge of 4 retail stores - A, B, C and D. The stores generated profits by selling products to consumers, but the products must first be ordered from a supplier and sent to the stores before the selling season began. Subjects were told that their decision in each round was to decide on how many units to order (this was called Order). In the centralized treatments, each subject made one order for all stores. To equalize the number of decisions that subjects made across the two different inventory structures, each subject also made only one order in the decentralized treatments - that order quantity was applied to each of the four stores.

The retail price p for each unit of the product sold was 10 points and the cost of each unit ordered from the supplier was set at either cₗₚ = 8 or cₕₚ = 2 points, corresponding to the low-profit and high-profit conditions respectively. Note that these parameter values yield a symmetric low-profit and high-profit design. To simplify the decision arithmetic, we set the salvage value s to be zero.

Next, subjects were told that the number of units that would be sold depended on the consumer demand for each store, which was uncertain at the time of the ordering decision and would be generated by the computer only after the order was placed.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

for each store had a distribution that was approximately normal,⁸ with a mean of μ=1000 units and a standard deviation of σ=400 units. Subjects were also told that the median and modal demand was 1000 and were provided a table that listed the chance (in percentages) that demand would fall within a particular range, with the range varying in increments of 200 units, from 0 up to 1800 units. For demand ranges above 1800, we simply included a row in the table that indicated that the percentage chance that demand for each store would range from ‘1801 units and above’ was 2.3%. From this table, subjects were also able to discern the general shape and the symmetry of the distribution - for example, they were able to tell that the chances that demand for a store would fall within 601 to 800 and 1201 to 1400 were equal at 15.0%. In addition, all subjects were allowed to view an identical sample of 30 demand observations. In the experiment, the demand values generated varied across the twenty subjects within each session. However, subjects with the same identification numbers across the four treatments for the same given level of ρ received the same set of demand values (naturally, the set of demand values were different for the different scenarios of ρ = 0 and ρ = 0.8). This design feature is particularly useful because it will allow us to compare profits across treatments while controlling for the impact of demand realizations on actual profits.

For the scenario where ρ = 0, we simply told subjects in the instructions that the demands of stores A, B, C and D in each round were independently generated, clarifying that the demand value of one store would not affect the demand value of another store. In the scenarios where ρ = 0.8, we told subjects that the demands are positively correlated with a correlation coefficient of 0.8, and also explained what the correlation coefficients of 0 and 1 meant. To further illustrate the concept of correlation, we also provided subjects with scatter plots of the demands between two stores for these three values of ρ. Finally, in all the treatments, subjects were also told that for each store, the past values of demand.

8We used the term ‘approximately normal’ because there was a 0.625% chance that the demand for a store would be less than 0 units. When generating the demand draws, we re-sampled the distribution whenever we encountered a demand that was less than 0. Since demand was always constrained to be positive and, we described the distribution as ‘approximately normal’, preferring it to the more technical term of ‘truncated normal distribution’ to avoid confusing subjects who might not be familiar with that term. All subjects were familiar with the normal distribution.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

are independent of future demand values, that is, there is no correlation in demands across decision rounds.

In the decentralized treatments, subjects were told that for each store, if the store’s demand was less than Order, the number of units sold would be the former and the leftovers would not have any salvage value. Conversely, if the store’s demand was greater than Order, the number of units sold would be the latter, so that there will be unmet demand. The point earnings in both these cases were carefully explained to the subjects. For example, for *cₗₚ = 8*, if Order was greater than the store’s demand, the point earnings for that store would be equal to 10*(Demand for that store) - 8*Order. Otherwise, the point earnings would be 10*Order - 8*Order.

In each round, subjects were paid based on the sum of point earnings across the four stores.

The information communicated in the centralized treatments was similar, except that Order was evaluated against the Total Consumer Demand, which was defined as the sum of the demands of the four stores. This was also the key distinction between the two inventory structures in our experimental instructions. For example, for *cₕₚ = 2* under centralization, the point earnings when Order was less than the Total Consumer Demand was 10*Order - 2*Order.9

The detailed instructions for the Centralized low-profit treatment for the ρ = 0 scenario can be found in Appendix B.

We faced two design challenges in converting the point earnings into cash. First, subjects should receive similar cash payments in each treatment so that stake size would not pose as a possible confound for any differences in decision performance across treatments.10 Second, the decision task must be payoff dominant so that any deviation in the ordering quantity from optimality involved a substantial drop in profit (Smith 1982).

To address the first challenge, we set a benchmark cash earnings level so that across all the four treatments, subjects would earn on average 40 cents in each round and receive an expected total sum of 20 dollars (inclusive of a 4 dollar start-up fee) for the 40 rounds if they order at the levels.

9 In practice, the earnings of the managers who make the order decisions may not be directly aligned with firm profits. The reward scheme in our experiment avoids this potential mis-alignment between individual and firm payoffs because we pay subjects the profits of the firm.

10 In a comprehensive review of the effects of financial incentives, Camerer and Hogarth (1999) show that stake size often does not change the main pattern of results in individual decision tasks. Despite this, we choose to be cautious and control for stake size explicitly.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

predicted by the standard inventory model. To address the second challenge, we performed an affine transformation of the cash conversion functions (which would not affect the optimal ordering decisions) so that subjects were required to exceed certain target point earnings in order to make a positive cash earning, and they made a negative cash earning if they failed to do so.

After the instructions were read, the experiment was implemented using a computer program specially written for the experiment. To familiarize them with the program and experimental procedure, subjects went through four practice rounds that carried no monetary consequences before the 40 decision rounds began. All subjects were given a start-up fee of 4 dollars. In every round, the computer displayed the round number, retail price, order cost, and the minimum points needed to achieve positive cash earnings on one side of the screen. Once subjects entered their ordering decisions, the computer displayed their ordering decisions, the demands for each of the four stores (and the Total Consumer Demand in the centralized treatments), the number of units sold for each store (with centralization, only the total number of units sold was displayed), the point and cash earnings for that round, and the cumulative cash earnings inclusive of the start-up fee. In addition, subjects were able to view all the decision and outcome histories of previous rounds. Hence, subjects did not have to compute their point and cash earnings after every round as these were performed by the computer. We computerized the earnings calculations because we wanted to eliminate computational errors (which might also lead subjects to make suboptimal ordering decisions) and more importantly, allow the subjects to concentrate solely on the ordering task so that the predictions of the standard inventory model would have the greatest chance of succeeding. Once the subjects completed the 40 rounds, they were paid their cash earnings privately and directed to leave the room.

Tables 1 and 2 show the point predictions for the order per store and the expected profits for all the four treatments under the standard inventory model where δₒ = δu = 0. Note that under decentralization, orders are not affected by the different ρ scenarios. We observe that under the standard inventory model, the optimal order on a per-store basis.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

under centralization is higher than under decentralization in the low-profit condition. In the ρ = 0 scenario, qc* = 832, which is higher than qd* = 663. Similarly, when ρ = 0.8, the centralized order is 690, compared to 663 under decentralization. In the high-profit condition (cₕₚ = 2), the pattern of orders is reversed. When ρ = 0, the optimal orders per-store with centralization is qc* = 1168, which is lower than qᵈ* = 1337 under decentralization. This is true also when ρ = 0.8: We have qc* = 1310, which is lower than qᵈ* = 1337.

——— INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE———

——— INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE———

From Table 2, notice that the standard inventory model predicts expected profits to be higher under centralization across both profit conditions. This is the risk pooling benefit of centralization mentioned at the beginning of the paper. In the ρ scenario, expected profits across the four stores under centralization are 2239 points higher relative to decentralization across both profit conditions. In contrast, the difference in expected profits shrinks to 349 points when ρ = 0.8.

# 3.2 Results

The average order per store and the total profits (for all four stores) for the four treatments are reported in Tables 1 and 2 respectively. Table 1 shows that there is a marked difference between actual average orders and the quantities predicted by the standard inventory model in all treatments. Orders in the two low-profit (cₗₚ = 8) treatments appear higher than predicted, while they are lower than predicted in the two high-profit (cₕₚ = 2) treatments. In other words, there is a pull-to-center pattern as predicted by the reference-dependence.

16 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

The average profits in Table 2 are directionally lower than the predictions of the standard inventory model in all four treatments. In the following paragraphs, we conduct formal statistical tests and summarize the main empirical findings. Because each subject made multiple decisions, we account for within-subject correlation by clustering the standard errors at the subject level in all the analyses.

# Result 1

Average orders in all four treatments differ significantly from the predictions of the standard inventory model and exhibit pull-to-center patterns.

We begin by comparing the average orders across all rounds against the point predictions of the standard inventory model using one-sample t-tests. The results are reported in Table 1. First, average orders in all four treatments are significantly different from their predicted levels (all p-values 0.000). Second, there is a pull-to-center pattern in all treatments. That is, in the low-profit condition across inventory structures and the two scenarios of ρ, average orders are higher than predicted by the standard inventory model (all p-values 0.000). Correspondingly, in the high-profit condition, average orders across inventory structures and levels of ρ are lower than predicted (all p-values 0.000). Overall, the pattern of actual orders is consistent with the prediction of the reference-dependence model as described in Proposition 1.

# Result 2

The pull-to-center effect is stronger in the high-profit condition, consistent with the prediction of the reference-dependence model when δₒ > δu.

Proposition 2 in this paper predicts that if δₒ > δu, the pull-to-center effect will be stronger in the high-profit condition relative to its symmetric low-profit condition. To test for differences in the degree of pull-to-center across profit conditions (which are symmetric in our experiment), we construct a measure of the pull-to-center effect for the experimental data in the following way. For the high-profit treatments, we define q∗ − qhp,st as a percentage measure of the degree of pull-to-center, where qhp,st is the per-store order of subject s in round t and q∗ is the optimal per-store order under the standard inventory model for that high-profit treatment. For the low-profit condition, we define qlp,st − q∗ as the percentage measure.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

of the degree of pull-to-center, where q∗ is the optimal order per store for that low-profit lp treatment. With this measure, a value of 0 indicates no pull-to-center and higher values represent stronger pull-to-center effects. Next, we compare the relative degree of the pull-to-center between the low-profit and high-profit conditions within each inventory structure and for the two different scenarios of ρ via four separate dummy-variable OLS regressions (using the high-profit condition as the treatment dummy). The results in Table 3 show that the high-profit condition exhibits a stronger degree of pull-to-center in all cases, which supports the prediction of Proposition 2.

# Table 3

——— INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE ———

# Table 4

——— INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE ———

It is important to note that the order decisions summarized in the above two results are remarkably consistent at the individual subject level. Table 4 displays the average order of each subject for all 40 rounds for all the four treatments. The data shows that the pull-to-center pattern in the orders are robust in that they are not driven by the aggregation of different segments of subjects, for example, one that orders close to the level predicted by the standard inventory model and another segment that deviates wildly in other directions. Out of the 160 subjects, only 6 did not exhibit pull-to-center behavior. Hence, the pattern of orders predicted by the behavioral model is robust at the individual subject level. Moreover, we did not detect any major shifts in ordering behavior across decision rounds. When we compare orders in the first 20 rounds with the last 20 rounds, we did not find any significant differences in orders in all treatment conditions except for the high-profit and ρ = 0.8 scenario. Here the orders in the last 20 rounds increased by an average of 32 units and 50.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

units in the centralized and decentralized cases respectively. However, these order levels are still significantly lower than those predicted by the standard inventory model.

# Result 3

Due to the pervasive pull-to-center pattern in orders, actual average profits are lower than predicted by the standard inventory model.

The results of the one-sample t-tests reported in Table 2 indicate that the actual average profits are significantly lower than the expected profits predicted by the standard inventory model in six out of the eight treatment-ρ conditions. For the other two conditions (centralized and decentralized in the low-profit condition when ρ = 0.8), although the average profit levels are not significantly different from those predicted by the standard inventory model, they are directionally lower. These results are not surprising given that actual orders deviate significantly from the predictions of the standard model. Overall, we find empirical support for Proposition 3.

We can also examine if the risk pooling benefits of centralization survive the pull-to-center pattern in orders. To do so, we compare the profit outcomes across the two inventory structures while controlling for the effect of demand on profits by matching profits of subjects with the same id across treatments. We first consider the ρ = 0 scenario, where centralization is predicted to yield the greatest profit difference. In the low-profit condition, profits under centralization are indeed higher (t=10.98, p=0.000). Furthermore, the percentage difference in actual profits is greater than the predicted difference of 64% (t=2.26, p=0.024) by the standard inventory model. In the high-profit condition, we also find that profit levels under centralization are higher (t=7.37, p=0.000). In terms of percentage difference, the predicted profit difference of 8% cannot be rejected at the 5% level (t=1.98, p=0.062). Hence, when demands across stores are uncorrelated, centralizing the inventory structure does indeed produce higher profits despite the pull-to-center biases in orders.

In contrast, we do not find empirical support for the superiority of centralization for the ρ = 0.8 scenario. In the low-profit condition, despite the profits being directionally higher under centralization, the profit difference is not statistically significant (t=1.37, p=0.186). We obtain the same pattern of results for the high-profit condition (t=1.66, p=0.112).

Note 19 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

that these results are obtained with 1600 observations in each test and after controlling for the effect of demands on profits. Moreover, we confirm that under our experimental design, centralization would indeed yield higher profits across both profit conditions if subjects were to order at the quantities predicted by the standard inventory model even though the predicted difference in the expected profits is small.¹¹ Hence, in this case, the biases in order quantities reduces the benefit of risk pooling.

# 3.3 Estimating the Behavioral Parameters

The results reported above show that the experimental data indicate support for the predictions of the reference-dependence model. To test the propositions more rigorously, we proceed to structurally estimate the parameter values of the reference-dependence model using the entire experimental dataset (i.e., for all S = 160 subjects and all T = 40 rounds). In the centralized treatments, we assume that order quantities made by each subject s in round t is normally distributed with mean Qc∗ given by equation (2.6) and variance due to(τ c)².

Similarly, under decentralization, orders are assumed to be normally distributed with mean qd∗ given by equation (2.4) and variance (τᵈ)². Note that μ = 1000 and σ = 400 in both Qᶜ∗ and qᵈ∗. The noise parameters (τ c)² and (τ d)² are specific to each treatment and for each ρ scenario. The behavioral parameters δₒ and δu are specified to be common across all the treatments since these psychological costs affect all decision-makers across both inventory structures and profit conditions. We estimate the full behavioral model and two nested models that correspond to Schweitzer and Cachon’s model and the standard inventory model using maximum likelihood.

The results of the estimation are displayed in Table 5. The figures in the parentheses are the t-statistics of the parameter estimates with the standard errors clustered at the subject level to account for within-subject correlation in ordering decisions. Column 1 of Table 5 shows the parameter estimates and model fit of the reference-dependence model that

11To check this, we compare the simulated profit outcomes across the two inventory structures assuming that subjects order the quantities predicted by the standard inventory model. Our test results confirm that the difference in profits between centralization and decentralization is statistically significant in both the low-profit (t=12.4, p=0.000) and the high-profit (t=14.3, p=0.000) conditions.

20 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

incorporates different psychological costs of leftovers and stock outs. The results demonstrate that δₒ &gt; δu &gt; 0: Every unit that the decision maker could have sold but was not in stock carries a psychological cost of 6.52 points (p=0.000), while every unit that is paid for but not sold costs 9.96 points (p=0.000). These estimates also confirm that the parametric requirements that yield Proposition 1 are satisfied: The ratio of δu is 0.65, which is greater than p−clp = 0.25 in the low-profit condition and smaller than p−chp = 4 in the high-profit condition of our experiment. Note that the psychological cost of a leftover, which has to be ordered and paid upfront, is about 1.53 times that of a stock out. As predicted in Proposition 2, this asymmetry in the psychological costs explains the stronger pull-to-center effects in the high-profit condition.

——— INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE ———

The results of the nested models are shown in columns 2 and 3 of Table 5. Column 2 displays the results of the model that does not allow for different psychological costs of leftovers and stock outs (i.e., δₒ = δu), which is mathematically equivalent to Schweitzer and Cachon’s model, while column 3 represents the standard inventory model (δₒ = δu = 0). The Wald tests show clearly that the behavioral model that allows for reference-dependence with asymmetric psychological costs of leftovers and stock outs explains the data better than these two models.¹²

Table 6 shows that the in-sample predictions of orders based on the estimated behavioral model track the actual average orders much more closely than the standard inventory model. Hence, our paper demonstrates that generalizing the standard inventory model by incorporating decision biases in subjects’ decision-making can be valuable because it can yield a much more predictive model of actual ordering behavior.

——— INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE ———

12Because the observations are not independent at the subject level, we used the Wald test instead of the traditional likelihood ratio test (Wooldridge 2001).

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

Finally, we compare the profit predictions of the estimated reference-dependence model with those of the standard inventory model. Table 7 contrasts the actual average profits with those predicted by the two models. This table shows that the behavioral model tracks the actual profits better in terms of absolute profit deviations in all four treatments and across the two ρ scenarios. This superiority carries over to the individual subject level. Under centralization, the behavioral model predicts average profit better than the standard inventory model in 27 and 32 out of 40 subjects in the low-profit (Z=2.21, p=0.027) and high-profit (Z=3.79, p=0.001) conditions respectively. This is also true under decentralization: The behavioral model dominates in 26 and 29 out of 40 subjects for the low-profit (Z=1.90, p=0.058) and high-profit (Z=2.85, p=0.004) conditions respectively.

——— INSERT TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE———

# 4 Validation Experiments

The experimental results corroborate the predictions of the behavioral model that orders across both the centralized and decentralized inventory structures will exhibit pull-to-center, with a stronger bias in the high-profit conditions. Although our model is rooted in the well-established concept of reference-dependence and the values of the behavioral parameters are reasonable, we recognize that there may be other models that can generate similar pull-to-center predictions. Hence, it is important to validate our behavioral model by showing that the psychological processes that we posit do indeed drive ordering decisions. Furthermore, a good strategy to validate our behavioral model would be to apply our understanding of the proposed psychological biases to alleviate or even eliminate the pervasive pull-to-center effects.

22 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

We conduct two follow-up experiments to meet these twin objectives. The basic idea behind the two experiments is to attempt to manipulate the relative salience of δu and δₒ in order to reduce the pull-to-center effects. It is also important to note that in our experiments, we do not seek to eliminate reference-dependence, that is, make δu and δₒ as close to zero as possible (if it were at all possible). Rather, we assume that these biases due to reference-dependence exist and try to increase the relative effect of one bias over the other to influence ordering decisions in the intended direction.13 We conduct both validation experiments in the simplest setting a centralized inventory structure with ρ = 0 and examine both the low-profit and high-profit conditions. The detailed instructions of the experiment can be found in Appendix B.

# 4.1 Experiment 2A

In the first experiment, we influence the relative strength of the reference-dependence parameters δu and δₒ in the following ways. For the low-profit condition, our goal was to reduce over-ordering (leading to a reduction of pull-to-center) by increasing δo. To achieve this, we increase the relative salience of δₒ by requiring subjects to compute and write down the number of leftover units and the profit loss from having those leftover units (by multiplying the number of leftover units by cₗₚ = 8) at the end of every decision round on a sheet of paper. Subjects were asked to write down ‘zero’ if there were no leftovers. Notice that we did not ask subjects to compute and record the costs of not meeting demand as we did not want to increase the salience of δu. Except for this change, the experimental instructions and procedure was identical to that of the main experiment described above. In the high-profit condition, we had the opposite objective of reducing under-ordering. Our aim was to reduce δo through increasing the salience of δu. Specifically, we asked subjects to compute the units that they could have sold and the corresponding loss in profits from not meeting the demand (by multiplying the number of units that could have been sold by the profit margin p − cₕₚ=8) at the end of every round. If there was no unmet demand, subjects were asked to write down ‘zero’.

Note that our validation strategy can only be operationalized in a model with separate psychological costs of leftovers and stock outs.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

told to write down ‘zero’. The results for the low-profit and high-profit conditions are reported in Tables 8 and 9 respectively. In each table, we report both the aggregate findings and the results for each subject id. First, from the left panel of Table 8, observe that despite asking subjects to record the profit losses from leftovers, the pull-to-center effect still exists - at the aggregate level, orders per store remain 54 units higher than the level of 832 units predicted by the standard inventory model (δₒ = δu = 0). We also find that 17 out of 20 subjects exhibited pull-to-center behavior in their ordering decisions. Next, we examine the more critical question of whether the pull-to-center bias is alleviated in this experiment by comparing the orders in this experiment with those from the same treatment in the main experiment (i.e., centralized, low-profit and ρ = 0) where subjects were not asked to record the losses from having leftovers. We perform the subject-level analysis by conducting two-sample t-tests for subjects with the same id across the two experiments (we are able to match subjects because subjects with the same id received the same demands). The right panel of Table 8 shows that in aggregate, average orders decreased by 54 units when subjects were asked to write down the losses from leftovers (t=-9.1, p=0.000). At the individual level, the pull-to-center bias is reduced for 15 out of 20 subjects. We obtain similar results for the high-profit condition where subjects were asked to write down their losses from stock outs. Notice from the left panel of Table 9 that subjects continue to under-order by an average of 103 units relative to the optimal level. Also, all subjects exhibit the pull-to-center bias. This is not surprising because our previous results show that the bias is stronger in the high-profit condition. More importantly, we examine if asking subjects to focus on losses from stock outs increases orders relative to the case when they were not asked to. The right panel of Table 9 shows that when subjects were asked to record the losses from not meeting demand, orders indeed increase by an average of 73 units (t=4.1, p=0.000). At the subject level, we find also that the pull-to-center bias is alleviated in 14 out of 20 cases.

——— INSERT TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE———

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# 4.2 Experiment 2B

In this second experiment, we manipulated the relative salience of δu and δₒ using a different mechanism. For the low-profit condition, we assessed a 5 cent cash penalty if there are leftovers at the end of every round. Denote e as the corresponding point penalty in the experiment that is equivalent to a 5 cent cash penalty. The expected utility for a decision maker with a penalty of e when facing leftovers is thus given by:

EUₑ(Qᵣ) = ∫ Qᵣ [(p − s)x − (clp − s)Qr − δo(Qr − x) − e] · f(x)dx

−∞ + ∫ ∞ [(p − cₗₚ)Qᵣ − δu(x − Qᵣ)] · f(x)dx. (4.13)

In the high-profit condition, we awarded a small 5 cent bonus for having no stock outs in each round (this can be also thought of as a bonus for meeting a customer service guarantee). Denote b as the corresponding bonus points in the experiment that is equivalent to a 5 cent cash bonus. The expected utility is thus given by:

EUb(Qᵣ) = ∫ Qᵣ [(p − s)x − (chp − s)Qr − δo(Qr − x) + b] · f(x)dx

−∞ + ∫ ∞ [(p − cₕₚ)Qᵣ − δu(x − Qᵣ)] · f(x)dx. (4.14)

Solving the F.O.C., we get:

F(Q∗) = { p−cₕₚ + δu + b·f(Q∗) for the high-profit condition

p + δu + δo

p−cₗₚ + δu − e·f(Q∗) for the low-profit condition

p + δu + δo (4.15)

As can be derived from Equation (4.15), the effect of introducing the small penalty of 5 cents in the standard model where δu = δ = 0 is to decrease the optimal per-store order from

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

832 to 818.¹⁴ Under the behavioral model, if the values of the behavioral parameters were to remain unchanged at δu = 6.52 and δₒ = 9.96, then the predicted order in the presence of the penalty would be 902 units compared to 907 units without the penalty. The key hypothesis is that the penalty would not only decrease orders because subjects respond to this additional pecuniary incentive (as predicted in both the standard and behavioral models), but that the penalty would also serve to increase the relative salience of δₒ. If this indeed occurs, then we would expect orders in the experiment to be less than 902.

Similarly, Equation (4.15) suggests that the presence of the b = 5 cent bonus has the effect raising per-store orders from 1168 to 1203 in the standard inventory model where δu = δ = 0 and from 1015 to 1038 in the reference-dependence model assuming that the values of the behavioral parameters remain unchanged. Again, the idea is that the bonus would also have the additional effect of increasing the relative salience of δu, so that orders would be greater than 1038. Across both profit conditions, note that the pull-to-center bias would be attenuated if the respective intended effects on δₒ and δu due to the introduction of the penalty/bonus are operative.

The results of this experiment are reported in Tables 10 and 11. The left panel of Table 10 shows that the pull-to-center bias persists in the orders of 12 out of 20 subjects in the low-profit condition when the small penalty for leftovers is levied. More critically however, orders are less than 902 in aggregate (t=-5.4, p=0.000) and in 9 out of these 12 subjects. Interestingly, the pull-to-center bias is eliminated for 8 subjects with the penalty. These results suggest that the penalty indeed has an effect of increasing the relative strength of δₒ, which reduces the tendency to over-order. When the bonus is awarded in the high-profit condition, the left panel of Table 11 shows that all 20 subjects continue to under-order. Again however, the pull-to-center bias is alleviated as orders are higher than 1038 by an average of 52 units (t=5.9, p=0.000), suggesting that the bonus also increases the salience of δu. At the individual level, we find that the pull-to-center bias is reduced in 70% of the subjects.

¹⁴ In this treatment, the conversion rate between experimental points and cash payment in cents is given by 0.0087. A cash penalty of 5 cents is therefore equivalent to e = 0.5 = 574 points in the experiment.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# 5 Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper, we present a behavioral model that incorporates reference-dependence to capture decision-making in a multi-location newsvendor setting. We show experimentally that the model can explain the pervasive pull-to-center biases in orders across both centralized and decentralized inventory structures and the high- and low-profit conditions. Moreover, our model provides an intuitive psychological explanation for why the pull-to-center effect is stronger in the high-profit conditions - this is because decision-makers’ psychological disutility for leftovers is stronger than that for stock outs. Our estimates indicate that the psychological aversion for having paid for something which turns out to have no value is 53% more painful than missing out on purchasing something that turns out to have value. Not only does our behavioral model track orders remarkably well, we also show that it beats out the standard inventory model in predicting profit outcomes. Finally, we conduct two validation experiments to show that the psychological posits of the behavioral model are operational. We do so by influencing the relative salience of the psychological cost of a leftover versus the psychological cost of a stock out to alleviate the pull-to-center bias.

The discussion in Section 2 has shown that our model is a mathematical generalization of Schweitzer and Cachon (2000) with δu = δₒ = δ. We note from Table 5 that allowing for δₒ > δu explains the experimental data better. To the best of our knowledge, this

27 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

This paper is the first to provide benchmark estimates of the relative weights of the disutility from incurring actual versus forgone losses. More importantly, the experiments in Section 4 provide support for the psychological drivers underlying our model - these experiments rely on the key premise that there are two different reference-dependence parameters and that we can increase the relative salience of one type of bias over the other.

Our paper also complements two other approaches that have been applied to study decision biases in newsvendor models. Su (2008) developed a quantal response framework that assumes that decision makers can make mistakes but that more costly mistakes occur less frequently. Our paper extends his approach by providing a psychological basis for why decision makers might appear to make errors. Moreover, we note that the quantal response model predicts that the modal order quantity will still be at that quantity prescribed by the standard inventory model. We do not find this pattern in our experimental data.15

Next, Bostian, Holt and Smith (2008) showed that an adaptive learning model that incorporates memory, reinforcement, and probabilistic choice (Camerer and Ho 1999) tracks order patterns across decision rounds well. We did not find any significant pattern of learning in our experiments, which has 40 decision rounds. Our findings are similar to those of Bolton and Katok (2008) who allowed subjects to make orders for 100 decision rounds in a single-store newsvendor experimental setting. They reported that orders exhibited a gradual trend toward the optimal order (if at all) only after 30 rounds. We believe that while examining how decision-makers learn over time is useful, it is equally, if not more important, to explain behavior in situations where the number of decision rounds is limited. This is because in many corporate settings, managers may not have the opportunity to ‘learn’ through making multiple ordering decisions over time. Hence, a model that can explain ordering decisions in the ‘early stages’ well, especially those decisions in more complex multi-location newsvendor settings, would be a useful contribution to the literature.

For the ρ = 0 scenario, the modal order per store under centralization is 1000 in both the low- and high-profit conditions. Under decentralization, the modal orders are 1000 and 800 in the low- and high-profit conditions respectively. When ρ = 0.8, the modal orders under centralization are 750 and 1000 in the low- and high-profit conditions respectively. Under decentralization, the corresponding modal orders are 800 and 1200. Note that all the modal orders are either at the center or exhibit pull-to-center.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

Our research is part of the emerging field of behavioral operations management where the central interest is to both understand and model actual human decision-making in operations management areas. Our behavioral model is based on the well-established concept of reference-dependence and nests the standard inventory model as a special case. The structural approach we have taken also allows us to formally quantify the extent of the psychological biases, which is one of the novel contributions of this paper.

There are many potential future research opportunities. One future research direction is to investigate the case where unmet demands can be back-ordered but there is a waiting cost experienced by customers. A natural question here is whether managers under-estimate the waiting costs experienced by customers. Another relevant research direction is to allow product returns (Pasternack 1985). We suspect that allowing product returns may reduce δₒ since returning unsold units reduces the actual overage cost. It will also be interesting to extend the current model to allow endogenous retail prices (Petruzzi and Dada 1999; He, Marklund, and Vossen 2008). We suspect that such a change may alleviate the psychological disutility to leftovers and stock outs to a certain extent because the firm can now adjust prices based on realized demands. However, we do not think that the biases will be completely eliminated because it may not be always optimal to set the retail price to equate orders with demand, so that there will still be leftovers and stock outs.

Another future research direction is to investigate the effects of decision biases in a broader supply chain context, which can be very useful in generating insights on how supply chain partners can work together to achieve high system efficiency (see Croson and Donohue 2006; Cui, Raju, and Zhang 2007; Lim and Ho 2007; Ho and Zhang 2008; Wu and Loch 2008 for some nascent studies along this line of research). Finally, it will be interesting to further examine the efficacy of centralized inventory structures over decentralized ones for broader sets of demand relationships across different locations.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# References

Bolton, Gary E. and Elena Katok. 2008. Learning-by-doing in the newsvendor problem: A laboratory investigation of the role of experience and feedback. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management 10(3) 519-538.

Bostian, A.J., Charles A. Holt and Angela M. Smith. 2008. The newsvendor “pull-to-center effect”: Adaptive learning in a laboratory experiment. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management 10(4) 590-608.

Camerer, Colin F., Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein and Richard Thaler. 1997. Labor supply of new york city cab drivers: one day at a time. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2) 407-442.

— and Teck-Hua Ho. 1999. Experience-weighted attraction learning in normal form games. Econometrica 67 837-874.

— and Robin Hogarth. 1999. The effects of financial incentives in experiments: a review and capital-labor-production framework. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19(1-3) 7-42.

Croson, Rachel and Karen Donohue. 2006. Behavioral causes of the bullwhip effect and the observed value of inventory information. Management Sci. 52(3) 323-336.

Cui, Tony Haitao, Jagmohan S. Raju and Z. John Zhang. 2007. Fairness and channel coordination. Management Sci. 53(8) 1303-1314.

Eppen, Gary D. 1979. Effects on centralization on expected costs in a multi-location newsboy problem. Management Sci. 25(5) 498-501.

Frederick, Shane, Nathan Novemsky, Jing Wang, Ravi Dhar and Stephen Nowlis. 2009. Opportunity cost neglect. J. Consumer Res. 36(4) 498-501.

Genosove, David and Christopher Mayer. 2001. Loss aversion and seller behavior: evidence from the housing market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4) 1233-1260.

He, Chuan, Johan Marklund and Thomas Vossen. 2008. Vertical information sharing in a volatile market. Marketing Sci. 27(3) 513-530.

Ho, Teck-Hua, Colin F. Camerer and Juin-Kuan Chong. 2007. Self-tuning experience weighted attraction learning in games. J. Econ. Theory 133(1) 177-139.

—, Noah Lim and Colin F. Camerer. 2006a. Modeling the psychology of consumer and firm behavior with behavioral economics. J. Marketing Res. 43(3) 307-331.

—, —, —. 2006b. How psychological should economic and marketing models be? J. Marketing Res. 43(3) 341-344.

—, and Juanjuan Zhang. 2008. Designing pricing contracts for boundedly rational customers: Does the framing of the fixed fee matter? Management Sci. 54(4) 686-700.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# References

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica 47 263-291.

K˝ oszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin. 2006. A model of reference-dependent preferences. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4) 1133-1165.

Lim, Noah. 2010. Social loss aversion and optimal contest design. J. Marketing Res. forthcoming.

— and Teck-Hua Ho. 2007. Designing price contracts for boundedly rational customers: Does the number of blocks matter? Marketing Sci. 26(3) 312-326.

Pasternack, Barry Alan. 1985. Optimal pricing and return policies for perishable commodities. Marketing Sci. 4(2) 166-176.

Petruzzi, Nicholas C., Maqbool Dada. 1999. Pricing and the newsvendor problem: A review with extensions. Oper. Res. 47(2) 183-194.

Schweitzer, Maurice E. and Gerard P. Cachon. 2000. Decision bias in the newsvendor problem with a known demand distribution: Experimental evidence. Management Sci. 46(3) 404-420.

Smith, Vernon. 1982. Microeconomic systems as a laboratory science. American Econ. Review, 72(5) 923-955.

Su, Xuanming. 2008. Bounded rationality in newsvendor models. Manufacturing Services and Operations Management, 10(4) 566-589.

Thaler, Richard. 1980. Towards a positive theory of consumer choice. J. of Econ. Behavior and Organization 1(1) 39-60.

—. 1985. Mental accounting and consumer choice. Marketing Sci. 4(3) 199-214.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey. 2001. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press.

Wu, Yaozhong and Christopher Loch. 2008. Social preferences and supply chain performance. Management Sci. 54(11) 1835-1849.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

|Treatments| | |Scenario ρ=0| | |Scenario ρ=0.8| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | |Theory| |Actual t-stat⁺|Theory| |Actual t-stat|
|Centralized|Low-Profit|832|941|5.4*| | | |
| |High-Profit|1168|992|-11.1*| | | |
|Decentralized|Low-Profit|663|813|4.9*| | | |
| |High-Profit|1337|1057|-8.0*| | | |

+ The t‑statistics are the results of the tests of average orders against the predictions of the standard inventory model.

* Indicates significance at the 5% level.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

|Treatments| | |Scenario ρ=0| | |Scenario ρ=0.8| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | |Theory|Actual|t-stat⁺|Theory|Actual|t-stat|
|Centralized|Low-Profit|5760|4633|-7.3*|3870|3606|-1.2|
| |High-Profit|29760|28082|-5.2*|27870|26578|-3.8*|
|Decentralized|Low-Profit|3521|2601|-6.0*|3521|3250|-1.2|
| |High-Profit|27521|25265|-6.1*|27521|26190|-3.5*|

Note: In the experiments, we use different point‑earnings‑to‑cash‑conversion ratios across the low‑profit and high‑profit treatments so that subjects will receive the same expected monetary payoff across the treatments if they order the quantities prescribed by the standard inventory model.

+ The t‑statistics are the results of the tests of average profits against the predictions of the standard inventory model.

* Indicates significance at the 5% level.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Table 3: Results of OLS Regressions on the Degree of Pull-to-Center Across Profit Conditions

|Treatment|Variable|Coefficient|t-stat|
|---|---|---|---|
|Centralized|(Base=Low-Profit)|0.65#|5.35*₊|
| |High-Profit|0.40|(2.61*|
|Decentralized|(Base=Low-Profit)|0.45|4.82*|
| |High-Profit|0.39|2.76*|
|Centralized|(Base=Low-Profit)|0.46|20.42*|
| |High-Profit|0.43|11.55*|
|Decentralized|(Base=Low-Profit)|0.42|18.19*|
| |High-Profit|0.29|(5.67*|

Notes: In each of the 4 regressions, there are 1600 observations and 40 subject clusters.

# The numbers in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are the robust standard errors.

* Indicates significance at the 5% level.

+ The numbers in parentheses below the t‑statistics are the p‑values.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Table 4: Average Orders (Per Store) By Subjects Across 40 Rounds

|Subject id⁺| |=0| | | | |=0.8| | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Centralized Cost=8|Centralized Cost=2|Decentralized Cost=8|Decentralized Cost=2|Centralized Cost=8|Centralized Cost=2|Decentralized Cost=8|Decentralized Cost=2| | |
|1|1020|921|538*|934|21|879|1045|765|1048|
|2|1050|1052|730|1063|22|859|1045|853|1120|
|3|897|1095|685|997|23|794|1071|789|1125|
|4|994|961|986|1399*|24|829|1052|840|1093|
|5|632*|1064|801|958|25|878|1096|757|1217|
|6|893|909|776|939|26|858|984|834|924|
|7|962|901|960|1114|27|803|1023|790|1109|
|8|952|883|668|1514*|28|819|1030|791|1135|
|9|952|1024|849|965|29|842|1025|792|1168|
|10|916|993|992|1059|30|815|1022|892|1070|
|11|872|942|799|879|31|873|1005|777|1142|
|12|968|998|880|880|32|782|994|799|1075|
|13|968|958|660*|1034|33|829|995|816|1122|
|14|990|1137|942|970|34|869|1065|750|1036|
|15|872|903|522*|1103|35|871|962|832|1054|
|16|925|994|848|916|36|795|1061|789|1141|
|17|926|988|893|1119|37|815|983|839|1006|
|18|1029|988|951|1129|38|794|1048|823|1094|
|19|930|1040|854|1029|39|820|1010|789|1068|
|20|1069|1093|936|1132|40|846|1136|787|1218|

+ In each of the four treatments, subjects were assigned id numbers from 1 to 20. Subjects with the same id number in the same ρ scenario received the same demands. Each subject participated in only one treatment.

* Indicates cases where average orders do not exhibit pull‑to‑center.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

**Table 5: Estimation Results of the Full Behavioral Model and Nested Models**
|Estimated Behavioral Parameters|(1) Full Behavioral Model|(2) Symmetric Costs for Leftovers and Stock Outs|(3) No Reference Dependence (Standard Inventory Model)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Åu|6.52|5.85|‑|
| |(12.15)*|(6.26)*| |
|Åₒ|9.96|-|‑|
| |(12.10)*| | |
|Õ c|606.3|593.4|734.7|
|lp, =0|(7.95)*|(7.02)*|(14.26)*|
|Õ c|579.9|647.1|903.8|
|hp, =0|(15.20)*|(14.60)*|(17.33)*|
|Õ d|181.6|187.1|235.5|
|lp, =0|(11.25)*|(9.36)*|(13.60)*|
|Õ d|241.4|255.9|369.8|
|hp, =0|(8.35)*|(11.84)*|(19.12)*|
|Õ c|412.6|436.7|708.0|
|lp, =0.8|(8.94)*|(9.30)*|(17.11)*|
|Õ c|455.8|598.8|1199.9|
|hp, =0.8|(11.59)*|(12.32)*|(35.08)*|
|Õ d|97.7|110.9|171.8|
|lp, =0.8|(9.96)*|(9.94)*|(17.01)*|
|Õ d|181.7|180.1|295.6|
|hp, =0.8|(12.21)*|(12.72)*|(21.33)*|
|-LL|45391|45890|48496|
|Wald Test & p-value|2|Ä²(2)=154.1| |
|(Test against Full Behavioral Model)|p=0.000|p=0.000| |

Figures in parentheses are the t‑statistics. * indicates significance at the 5% level.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Table 6: In-Sample Order Predictions (Per Store) of the Behavioral and Standard Models

|Treatments| |ρ=0| | |ρ=0.8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Centralized|Low-Profit|Behavioral Model|Standard Theory| | |
| |(cost=8)|907# (-34)|832 (-109)| | |
| |High-Profit|Behavioral Model|Standard Theory| | |
| |(cost=2)|1029 (+37)|1168 (+176)| | |
|Decentralized|Low-Profit|Behavioral Model|Standard Theory| | |
| |(cost=8)|804 (-9)|663 (-150)| | |
| |High-Profit|Behavioral Model|Standard Theory| | |
| |(cost=2)|1057 (0)|1337 (+280)| | |

# Numbers in parentheses represent the deviation in units from the actual average order.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

|Treatments| | |ρ=0| | |ρ=0.8| |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Actual Average|Standard Model Predictions|Behavioral Model Predictions|Actual Average|Standard Model Predictions|Behavioral Model Predictions| | |
|Centralized Low-Profit (cost=8)| |4633|5760|5583|3606|3870|3544|
| |(+1127) (+950)|( +264) (-62)| | | | | |
|Centralized High-Profit (cost=2)| |28082|29760|29076|26578|27870|26609|
| |(+1678) (+994)|( +1292) (+31)| | | | | |
|Decentralized Low-Profit (cost=8)| |2601|3521|3167|3250|3521|3167|
| |(+920) (+566)|( +271) (-83)| | | | | |
|Decentralized High-Profit (cost=2)| |25265|27521|26153|26190|27521|26153|
| |( +2256) (+888)|( +1331) (-37)| | | | | |

Note: In the experiments, we use different point‑earnings‑to‑cash‑conversion ratios across the low‑profit and high‑profit treatments so that subjects will receive the same expected monetary payoff across the treatments if they order the quantities prescribed by the standard inventory model.

# Numbers in parentheses represent the deviation in units from the actual average profits.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

|Overall Data|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?|Pull-to-Center Bias Alleviated?|Pull-to-Center Bias Alleviated?|Pull-to-Center Bias Alleviated?| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Difference in Mean Order| |t-stat|Exists?|Difference in Mean Order|t-stat|Alleviated?|
|Overall Data|54.2|6.3|Yes|-54.4|-9.1|Yes|
|Individual subjects|Test by matching subjects with the same id in the Main Experiment|Test by matching subjects with the same id in the Main Experiment|Test by matching subjects with the same id in the Main Experiment|Test by matching subjects with the same id in the Main Experiment|Test by matching subjects with the same id in the Main Experiment|Test by matching subjects with the same id in the Main Experiment| | | | | |
|1|101|7.8|Yes|-87|-4.2|Yes|
|2|-2|-0.2|No|-220|-13.7|Completely*|
|3|43|5.9|Yes|-21|-0.8|No|
|4|60|3.8|Yes|-102|-4.1|Yes|
|5|132|7.0|Yes|332|8.3|No|
|6|17|2.8|Yes|-44|-2.8|Yes|
|7|-5|-1.2|No|-135|-6.3|Completely|
|8|61|3.6|Yes|-58|-2.5|Yes|
|9|80|7.7|Yes|-39|-2.1|Yes|
|10|33|6.1|Yes|-50|-2.1|Yes|
|11|67|7.4|Yes|28|1.6|No|
|12|41|5.1|Yes|-95|-4.6|Yes|
|13|37|6.7|Yes|-98|-6.5|Yes|
|14|98|6.7|Yes|-60|-3.5|Yes|
|15|79|8.4|Yes|39|2.1|No|
|16|-20|-1.5|No|-113|-6.6|Completely|
|17|69|8.1|Yes|-26|-1.2|No|
|18|73|6.4|Yes|-124|-4.0|Yes|
|19|35|4.9|Yes|-63|-5.1|Yes|
|20|84|4.2|Yes|-153|-6.0|Yes|

* The pull‑to‑center bias is completely eliminated.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

|Overall Data|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?|Pull-to-Center Bias Alleviated?|Pull-to-Center Bias Alleviated?|Pull-to-Center Bias Alleviated?| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|(Test: Order per Store less than 1168)|Difference in Mean Order|t-stat|(Test: Two-sample test with data from Main Experiment)|Difference in Mean Order|t-stat| |
| |-102.8|-13.8|Yes|73.1|4.1|Yes|
|Individual subjects| | | | | | |
|1|-120|-25.6|Yes|127|6.5|Yes|
|2|-109|-4.6|Yes|7|0.3|No|
|3|-35|-5.7|Yes|38|3.0|Yes|
|4|-72|-6.6|Yes|136|5.2|Yes|
|5|-119|-5.3|Yes|-15|-0.4|No|
|6|-157|-7.2|Yes|102|2.8|Yes|
|7|-110|-14.9|Yes|167|9.7|Yes|
|8|-115|-27.9|Yes|171|14.2|Yes|
|9|-134|-12.0|Yes|10|0.4|No|
|10|-130|-14.9|Yes|45|3.0|Yes|
|11|-81|-8.9|Yes|146|6.1|Yes|
|12|-154|-17.5|Yes|16|0.9|No|
|13|-50|-4.5|Yes|160|11.2|Yes|
|14|-80|-9.1|Yes|-49|-2.7|No|
|15|-103|-9.6|Yes|162|5.7|Yes|
|16|-139|-12.4|Yes|36|3.2|Yes|
|17|-97|-5.1|Yes|84|3.8|Yes|
|18|-71|-7.5|Yes|110|5.1|Yes|
|19|-72|-10.8|Yes|56|2.0|Yes|
|20|-120|-5.8|Yes|-45|-1.4|No|

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

|Overall Data|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?|Pull-to-Center Bias Less than Predicted?|Pull-to-Center Bias Less than Predicted?| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|(Test: Order per Store greater than 817.75)*|(Test: Order per Store smaller than 902)#|Difference in Mean Order|t-stat|Alleviated?| | |
|Overall Data|35|3.8|Yes|-49|-5.4|Yes|
|1|59|5.8|Yes|-25|-2.4|Yes|
|2|6|1.0|No|-79|-14.2|Completely⁺|
|3|40|11.5|Yes|-44|-12.7|Yes|
|4|70|10.5|Yes|-14|-2.2|Yes|
|5|-15|-1.1|No|-100|-6.9|Completely|
|6|52|15.0|Yes|-32|-9.2|Yes|
|7|27|2.5|Yes|-57|-5.1|Yes|
|8|-23|-1.8|No|-107|-8.5|Completely|
|9|0.1|0.01|No|-84|-6.4|Completely|
|10|-20|-1.4|No|-104|-7.3|Completely|
|11|-21|-2.7|No|-105|-13.5|Completely|
|12|96|6.7|Yes|12|0.8|No|
|13|111|8.2|Yes|27|2.0|No|
|14|60|5.0|Yes|-24|-2.0|Yes|
|15|17|1.5|No|-67|-5.7|Completely|
|16|24|2.6|Yes|-61|-6.6|Yes|
|17|40|24.8|Yes|-45|-27.8|Yes|
|18|56|5.5|Yes|-28|-2.7|Yes|
|19|13|0.4|No|-71|-2.2|Completely|
|20|102|8.6|Yes|18|1.5|No|

* The number 817.75 is the optimal order per store when there are no behavioral biases taking into account the penalty for leftovers.

# The number 902 is the predicted optimal order per store taking into account the penalty for leftovers and assuming that Åu = 6.52 and ÅÐ = 9.96, which are estimated from the data in the first experiment.

⁺ The pull‑to‑center bias is completely eliminated.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

|Pull-to-Center Bias Exists?| | | |Pull-to-Center Bias Less than Predicted?| | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |(Test: Order per Store smaller than 1202.5)*| | |(Test: Order per Store greater than 1038.3) #| | |
|Difference in Mean Order|t-stat|Exists?|Difference in Mean Order|t-stat|Alleviated?| |
|Overall Data|-112|-12.7|Yes|52|5.9|Yes|
|One-sample t-test| | | | | | |
|Individual subjects| | | | | | |
|1|-88|-7.0|Yes|77|6.1|Yes|
|2|-74|-10.3|Yes|90|12.5|Yes|
|3|-68|-12.4|Yes|96|17.6|Yes|
|4|-101|-8.1|Yes|63|5.1|Yes|
|5|-105|-41.4|Yes|60|23.7|Yes|
|6|-163|-5.9|Yes|1|0.1|No|
|7|-162|-10.6|Yes|2|0.1|No|
|8|-163|-15.0|Yes|2|0.2|No|
|9|-72|-4.1|Yes|92|5.3|Yes|
|10|-103|-12.1|Yes|61|7.2|Yes|
|11|-157|-17.3|Yes|7|0.8|No|
|12|-70|-4.8|Yes|94|6.5|Yes|
|13|-82|-5.4|Yes|82|5.4|Yes|
|14|-72|-3.7|Yes|92|4.7|Yes|
|15|-181|-17.5|Yes|-16|-1.6|No|
|16|-160|-14.9|Yes|5|0.4|No|
|17|-129|-20.4|Yes|35|5.5|Yes|
|18|-100|-14.5|Yes|64|9.3|Yes|
|19|-65|-4.7|Yes|99|7.1|Yes|
|20|-133|-10.2|Yes|32|2.4|Yes|

* The number 1202.5 is the optimal order per store when there are no behavioral biases taking into account the bonus for meeting demand.

# The number of 1038.3 is the predicted optimal order per store taking into account the bonus and assuming that Åu = 6.52 and ÅÐ = 9.96, which are estimated from the data in the first experiment.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Appendix A

Proof of Proposition 1. When the critical ratio in the standard model is larger than 0.5, i.e., when  p−chp ≥  1 or p + s − 2chp ≥  0, there is pull-to-center if the critical ratio in the model with reference-dependence is smaller than that in the standard model. This leads to

p−s p − chp + δu  <  p − chp  (A1)

− s + δu + δo p − s

It is easy to show that equation (A1) is equivalent to δu < p−chp. The proof of equation (2.8) follows similarly. δo chp + s Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 2 Let’s prove the sufficient condition here, i.e., δo > δu > 0 (δu > δo > 0) leads to stronger (weaker) pull-to-center effect in the high-profit condition compared to a symmetric low-profit condition. The proof of the necessary condition follows in a similar fashion. Suppose the critical ratio in the high-profit condition in the model without reference-dependence is given by p−chp ≥ 1, and the critical ratio in the low-profit condition is given by p−c < 1 p−s 2 p−c p−c lp. The symmetry between the two profit conditions leads to hp = 1 − lp, i.e., p−s 2 chp = p − clp + s (A2)

The critical ratios in the model with reference-dependence are given by p + δu − chp in the high-profit condition and p + δ − c p + δu − s + δo lp in the low-profit condition. This leads to

p p + δu − chp = p + δu − (p − clp + s) < 1 − p + δu − clp (A3)

for any δo > δu > 0. This leads to

{ Qc* − n · μ < n · μ − Qc* in centralization

r, hp r, lp .

qd* − μ < μ − qd* in decentralization

r, hp r, lp

The symmetry between the two profit conditions also implies that

{ Qc* − n · μ = n · μ − Qc* in centralization

dhp lp .

q* − μ = μ − qd* in decentralization

hp lp

Equations (A4) and (A5) lead to Ωc > Ωc and Ωd > Ωd.

hp lp hp lp

In a similar fashion, it can be proven that Ωc < Ωc and Ωd < Ωd if and only if δu > δo > 0. hp lp hp lp Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition 3 The expected profit EΠ(Q) as a function of the ordering quantity Q (Q = Qd under decentralization or Qc under centralization) for a retailer facing with a demand distribution with p.d.f. h(x) is given by

EΠ(Q) = ∫ Q [px + s(Q − x)] · h(x)dx + ∫ ∞ pQ · h(x)dx − cQ, (A6)

−∞ Q

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

where H(·) is the focal distribution of demand that the retailer uses to make orders — under centralization, H(·) = G(·) and under decentralization H(·) = F(·). Standard steps lead to

EΠ(Q) = (p − c)μH − (c − s)(Q − μH ) − (p − s)σH R(Q − μᴴ )               (A7)

where μH and σ² are the mean and variance of the focal demand with distribution H(·) and R(τ) = ∫∞(y − H 1  −y2 Q∗ and τ∗    τ)√2π e 2 dy. It is thus easy to show that the profit difference for two orders Qᵣ is given by

EΠ(Q∗) − EΠ(Q∗)   =  (p − c)μH − (c − s)(Q∗ − μH ) − (p − s)σH R(Q∗ − μᴴ )       (A8)

r       [                                      σH∗         ]

−  (p − c)μH − (c − s)(Q∗ − μH) − (p − s)σHR(Qʳ − μᴴ )

r  [    ∗             σH    ]

=  (c − s)(Q∗ − Q∗) + (p − s)σH R(Qʳ − μᴴ ) − R(Q∗ − μᴴ )

r                      σH           σH

Since the optimal order in the standard model Q∗ is solved through F.O.C. and such an optimal order is unique, any other order Q∗ = Q∗   will lead to a lower profit, EΠ(Q∗) &lt; EΠ(Q∗).                               r                                   r

Q.E.D.

44

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Appendix B: Instructions

# Instructions for Experiment 1

This is an experiment in decision-making. If you follow the instructions carefully and make good decisions, you could earn a considerable amount of money which will be paid to you in cash before you leave today. What you earn today partly depends on your own decisions and partly on chance. It is important that you do not look at the decisions of others, and that you do not talk, laugh, or make noises during the experiment. You will be warned if you violate this rule the first time. If you violate this rule twice, you will be asked to leave the room immediately and your cash earnings will be $0. There will be a total of 40 decision rounds in this experiment. In each round, you will make point earnings. The more points you earn, the more cash earnings you make. The decision steps and how you earn points in every round are described as follows:

In each round, you will act as a manager in charge of 4 retail stores, Store A, Store B, Store C and Store D. All four retail stores make profits by selling products to consumers, but to be able to sell the products, you must first order the products from a supplier before the selling season begins. Your decision is to decide how many units of the product to order (call this decision “Order”).

1. In each round, you will make a single order decision that represents the total order for all the four stores.
2. Each unit of the product that is sold to consumers retails for a price of 10 points.
3. The cost of each unit of the product that you order from the supplier is 8 points.
4. For each of the four stores, the consumer demand, or the number of units that consumers want to buy (call them Demand A, Demand B, Demand C and Demand D for Stores A, B, C and D respectively) is uncertain at the time of your ordering decision. The actual values of Demand A, Demand B, Demand C and Demand D will be known to you only after you make the decision of how many units to order.
5. For each of the four stores, the consumer demand has a distribution that is approximately normal, with an average (i.e., mean) demand of 1000 units and a standard deviation of 400 units. The median and mode of the demand distribution is also 1000 units. The smallest possible demand value is 0 and the consumer demand is in integer numbers. As an illustration of the demand distribution, the table below shows the chance (in percentages) that demand will fall within a certain range.
6. In each round, after you have submitted your order decision, the computer program will generate the actual values of Demand A, Demand B, Demand C and Demand D. The values of Demand A, Demand B, Demand C and Demand D are independently generated according to the distribution described above. That is, the demand for a store does not depend on the demand for another store.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Range of Demand for Each Store

|Range of Demand|Percentage Chance that Demand will fall in this Range|
|---|---|
|0 to 200|2.3%|
|201 to 400|4.4%|
|401 to 600|9.2%|
|601 to 800|15.0%|
|801 to 1000|19.1%|
|1001 to 1200|19.1%|
|1201 to 1400|15.0%|
|1401 to 1600|9.2%|
|1601 to 1800|4.4%|
|1801 and above|2.3%|

Not affect the demand value that will be drawn for another store. The computer will generate the demand values for each of the four stores in the same manner in every round. Moreover, for each store, the past values of demand are independent of the future values of demand.

1. If the Total Consumer Demand (i.e., Demand A + Demand B + Demand C + Demand D) is less than the number of units you order, the total number of units that the four stores will sell is the Total Consumer Demand. In this case there will be some units which you ordered for the stores but cannot sell. These unsold units of the product have zero value to you.
2. Conversely, if the Total Consumer Demand is greater than the number of units ordered, the number of units sold in total will be the number of units you ordered. In this case there will be some consumer demand that cannot be met.
3. Depending on the actual number of units you order (Order) and the Total Consumer Demand, your point earnings in each round is given as follows:

If Total Consumer Demand &lt; Order: Point Earnings = Retail Price*(Total Consumer Demand) - (Cost per unit ordered)*Order = 10*(Total Consumer Demand) - 8*Order

If Total Consumer Demand &gt; Order: Point Earnings = Retail Price*(Order) - (Cost per unit ordered)*Order = 10*(Order) - 8*Order

The computer program will calculate your point earnings in every round.

Your actual cash earnings for each round will be 0.0087*(Your Point Earnings - 1152). That is, every 1000 points you earn above the number 1152 earns you 8.7 cents. Note that your cash earnings will be negative if your point earnings for that round fall below 1152.
Your total cash earnings in this experiment will be $4 plus your cash earnings for the 40 decision rounds (we will deduct negative cash earnings from your total earnings as well). The computer program will calculate your cash earnings for each round and your total cash earnings for all the rounds you have completed. We will pay you immediately at the end of

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

# Instructions for Experiment 2

In Experiment 2, we manipulated the relative strength of the psychological costs of leftovers and stock outs for the treatment setting where the inventory structure is centralized and the demands across stores are independent. The instructions are identical to those of the main experiment, except that the additional points are inserted following point number 10.

# Experiment 2A (Recording Losses from Leftovers or Stock Outs)

# Low-Profit Condition:

In every round, we ask that you compute and record down the “Loss from Leftover Units” in the sheet provided. This loss is incurred whenever your Order is greater than the Total Consumer Demand. This loss in point earnings is the Number of Unsold Units (i.e., Order - Total Consumer Demand) multiplied by the cost per unit ordered (which is equal to 8 points). Please write 0 if there is no loss in that round.

# High-Profit Condition:

In every round, we ask that you compute and record down the “Loss from Not Meeting Consumer Demand” in the sheet provided. This loss is incurred whenever your Order is less than the Total Consumer Demand. This loss in point earnings is the Demand That Was Not Met (i.e., Total Consumer Demand - Order) multiplied by the per unit profit that could have been earned (which is the price of 10 points minus the cost per unit ordered of 2 points = 8 points). Please write 0 if there is no loss in that round.

# Experiment 2B (Penalty for Leftovers/Bonus for No Stock Outs)

# Low-Profit Condition:

In addition to the cash earnings as described above, there will be a penalty of 5 cents (i.e., 5 cents will be deducted from your total cash earnings) if there are unsold units for that round, that is, when your Order is greater than the Total Consumer Demand for that round. After every round, we ask that you record down whether your Order is greater than the Total Consumer Demand in the sheet provided. Please write down “1” if this occurs and “0” if it does not.

# High-Profit Condition:

In addition to the cash earnings as described above, you will receive a bonus of 5 cents whenever you meet the Total Consumer Demand for that round, that is, when your Order is greater than or equal to the Total Consumer Demand for that round. After every round, we ask that you record down whether your Order is greater than or equal to the Total Consumer Demand in the sheet provided. Please write down “1” if this occurs and “0” if it does not.

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1419725

