# Keeping safe versus staying healthy: The effect of regulatory fit on social distancing

# Jiaqian Wang & Angela Y. Lee

# abstract*

Some states’ COVID-19 social distancing directives spotlight the goal of health promotion (that is, staying healthy), whereas others underscore illness prevention (that is, keeping safe). Regulatory fit theory holds that persuasiveness is influenced by how well the framing of a message resonates with fundamental motivations that influence recipients’ behavior. People who are motivated to approach desirable outcomes generally respond best to health messages having a promotion frame, whereas people who are motivated to avoid undesirable outcomes respond best to health messages having a prevention frame. In the research presented in this article, we show that the effectiveness of COVID-19-related directives is influenced by the fit between promotion or prevention framing and the recipients’ identity—whether they view themselves as independent actors or as part of a larger community. We found that an appeal that highlighted health promotion and benefits to the individual (as in “what you can do to help you stay healthy”) or one that highlighted disease prevention and protection of society (as in “what you can do to keep America safe”) led to greater intent to practice social distancing than did appeals using other pairings of framing and identity, particularly in people who were not already practicing rigorous social distancing. The findings suggest that policymakers should consider regulatory fit—and specifically, the pairings described above—when designing public health communications relating to COVID-19 and other directives.

Wang, J., & Lee, A. Y. (2020). Keeping safe versus staying healthy: The effect of regulatory fit on social distancing. Behavioral Science & Policy 6 (2), 25–34. Retrieved from https://behavioralpolicy.org/journal_issue/covid-19/

a publication of the behavioral science & policy association

25

Public health experts have determined that our proposal in part on past research showing social distancing is important to slowing the spread of COVID-19. After the declaration of a national emergency on March 13, 2020, many state and local governments issued stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders. Some directives have used a “stay healthy” appeal, emphasizing health promotion (as has occurred in Arizona,1 Kentucky,2 Nebraska,3 and Washington4), but others have used a “keep safe” appeal, emphasizing disease prevention (as in Connecticut,5 Michigan,6 Utah,7 and Vermont8). Consequently, appeals that make an individual identity salient while advocating a promotion goal or appeals that make a group identity salient while advocating a prevention goal should be more persuasive than appeals that mismatch identity and goal.910

In this article, we report on two experiments that draw on regulatory fit theory to examine whether the effectiveness of such appeals also depends on which of the participants’ identities is made salient—that is, on whether the recipients’ view of themselves as either an independent actor or a part of a larger, interdependent community is emphasized. The studies were conducted nine days apart in March 2020.

Regulatory fit theory posits that people become more engaged in pursuing a goal when their goal-pursuit strategy matches their regulatory orientation: the motivation that guides their attention, attitudes, and behaviors. For instance, some people are driven primarily by approaching desirable outcomes (that is, they are promotion oriented), whereas other people are driven by avoiding undesirable outcomes (that is, they are prevention oriented). The regulatory fit literature indicates that communications do a better job of persuading people to act if they are framed to match the recipients’ regulatory orientation.1112

For example, people who are motivated to attain desirable outcomes would respond best to health-promotion-oriented “stay healthy” messages, whereas those who are motivated to avoid undesirable outcomes would respond best to disease-prevention-oriented “keep safe” messages.

In the second experiment, we added another prediction. Prior research had suggested that people who are already adopting a recommended action are less sensitive to whether a message’s promotion or prevention focus matches their inclination to seek positive outcomes or avoid negative ones.1314 We proposed that the regulatory fit effect on people’s intention to comply with social distancing guidance would be strongest among people who were not already practicing social distancing rigorously. The results support this notion.

For both studies, we preregistered a primary plan of examining people’s perceptions of the pandemic and the effect of regulatory fit on the behavioral science & policy.

volume 6 issue 2 2020

adoption of various precautionary measures (see note A). After we collected the data, we decided to concentrate on social distancing intentions as our primary outcome. We also made the decision to examine the moderating role of current social distancing practice after the data had been collected. See the Supplemental Material for fuller details of the procedures and analyses discussed in this article and for findings related to outcomes other than social distancing.

# Experiment 1

# Method

In Experiment 1, our main objective was to examine how the salience of participants’ identity influenced their responses to an appeal that emphasized health promotion (“stay healthy”) or disease prevention (“keep safe”) as the goal of adopting precautionary measures against COVID-19 advocated by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). We fielded the experiment on March 18, 2020, delivering an online survey through CloudResearch.¹⁵ The cumulative numbers of infections and deaths in the United States on that day were reported as 7,624 and 115, respectively. 16 After removing responses that could have been duplicates, we ended up with 1,201 participants. The mean age of the participants was 39.89 years (range: 18–78 years); 51% of the participants were male.

Participants responded to all survey items using interval scales. We first asked them to judge the seriousness of the risk posed by COVID-19 to themselves, their community, and the United States separately. They also estimated the number of confirmed cases and deaths and reported the outbreak’s perceived emotional, economic, and social impact on them. Then they indicated the extent of their current adherence to recommended public health guidelines, such as various social distancing and hygiene measures (by responding “yes,” “trying to,” or “no” to each measure; see the Supplemental Material for the results relating to the other precautionary measures).

Next, all participants read the same message describing what the government was doing to curb the spread of COVID-19 and outlining the CDC guidelines on social distancing and other precautionary measures. This message was presented under one of six headlines. Half of the participants saw a headline that emphasized the goal of health promotion but varied in the highlighted audience; it said, “Here’s what you can do to help ______ stay healthy,” with either you, your community, or America appearing in the blank. The other half of the participants saw a headline that emphasized illness prevention. It said, “Here’s what you can do to keep _______ safe,” with again either you, your community, or America appearing in the blank.

# Analyses & Results

After we collected the data, we decided to focus on participants’ intentions to social distance as the key outcome measure, because social distancing is considered the best way to reduce the spread of COVID-19; 17 social distancing intentions can also serve as a proxy for recipients’ intentions to adopt other precautionary measures. We assessed this outcome by averaging the responses to the items that measured intentions to stay home, to socialize with friends online or by phone, and to socialize with friends in person (which was reverse-coded so that greater compliance with CDC recommendations was indicated by a higher score, as with the other two items). See the Supplemental Material for the results relating to the other precautionary measures.

We ran regression analyses to examine whether appeals that matched identity and benefit led to better outcomes than did those that mismatched identity and benefit. We also directly compared the outcomes when each of the two framing.

approaches (“stay healthy” and “keep safe”) was message highlighted America as a group identity paired with each of the three highlighted identi - (emphasizing consequences to America), partic- ipants expressed higher intentions to social distance if the appeal also advocated a preven - tion (“keep safe”) benefit ( M = 9.32) rather than a promotion (“stay healthy”) benefit ( M = 8.90, d = 0.25, p  = .013). Looked at from a different perspective, the results indicated, as predicted, that in the context of a health-promotion (“stay healthy”) appeal, the message was more effec - tive in persuading participants to social distance ( b = 0.73, 95% CI [0.26, 1.21], p = .002). (See note B for informa - tion about the statistical notations used in this article.) More specifically, as Figure 1 shows, when the message highlighted an individual identity (emphasizing consequences to the self), participants expressed higher intentions to social distance if the appeal also advocated a promotion (“stay healthy”) benefit ( M = 9.32) rather than a prevention (“keep safe”) benefit (M = 9.01, d = 0.19, p = .072). In contrast, when the

# Figure 1. Mean social distancing intention as a function of frame & identity (Experiment 1)

| |Self|Community|America| | | | | | | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|11|10|9.01|9.00|9.32|9.32|9.31|8.90| | | | |
|9| | |8|3|6|2|5|4|3|2|1|

participants’ community group identity was highlighted, the effect of frame was similar to when participants’ individual identity was high - lighted. Specifically, the appeal advocating a promotion benefit ( M = 9.31) led to higher intentions to practice social distancing than did that advocating a prevention benefit ( M = 9.00, d = 0.17, p  = .077). Perhaps the reason for the unexpected results is that participants were reflecting more on themselves when the message referenced the community. Given this pattern of findings, we do not discuss the community-related outcomes in the text that follows (see details on community-related data in the Supplemental Material).

Because political party affiliation might influ - ence people’s perception of the pandemic and their social distancing practices, we exam - ined participants’ party affiliation as a potential moderator of the proposed regulatory fit effect for framing and identity. In general, Democrats perceived themselves to be more vulnerable to COVID-19 than Republicans and those with other affiliations did, and a higher percentage of Democrats (78.8%) reported that the pandemic had led them to stay home more compared with Republicans (65.9%) and those with other affiliations (69.0%; see Tables S1–S2 in the Supplemental Material). However, the regulatory.

Note. Pairing a “keep safe” messaging frame with an emphasis on recipients’ identity as Americans (“Here’s what you can do to keep America safe”) led to a greater intention to practice social distancing than did pairing this frame with an emphasis on the self (“Here’s what you can do to help you keep safe”), or on being a part of a community (“Here’s what you can do to help your community keep safe”). A “stay healthy” messaging frame was most eﬀective when paired with an emphasis on the self (“Here’s what you can do to help you stay healthy”) or on the community (“Here’s what you can do to help your community stay healthy”). Error bars indicate 95% conﬁdence intervals.

behavioral science & policy | volume 6 issue 2 2020

fit effect on social distancing intention was not contingent on party affiliation; none of the interactions among identity, message frame, and political party were significant (all ps > .31). Participants indicated that they were staying at home more due to the pandemic (85% versus 73%, p < .001) and were more likely to work remotely (68% versus 62%, p = .005), but participants were less likely to engage in virtual socializing (67% versus 62%, p = .025).

# Experiment 2

# Method

We launched Experiment 2 on March 27, 2020, to see if the findings would confirm the effect of regulatory fit on people’s intentions to take precautions against COVID-19. After removing duplicates and one respondent who was not a U.S. resident, we had a final sample of 998 participants. The mean age of the participants was 39.54 years (range: 19–84 years); 45% were male. The cumulative number of infections and deaths in the United States exceeded 86,000 and 1,300, respectively, on the day of survey launch.

We followed procedures similar to those of Experiment 1, with two key modifications. First, we eliminated the consideration of the local community identity. Second, we added another measure of intention to practice social distancing. After participants saw the health communication, we asked them to indicate the number of times they planned to leave home in the next seven days for various reasons (for work, to shop for groceries and other daily necessities, to pick up medication, to exercise, to get together with friends or family, to get some fresh air, and to exercise their right to freedom) on a scale ranging from 0 = not going out for this reason to 8 = more than once a day. We reasoned that the more effective the messaging was, the fewer trips participants would plan to make. We excluded work-related trips in these analyses because we considered these to be out of participants’ control. In line with this assumption, we did not observe a fit effect on participants’ intention to leave home for work (see Tables S39–S40 in the Supplemental Material).

# Analyses & Results

We first ran regression analyses to examine whether intention to social distance after reading the public health communication could be enhanced by any combination of frame, identity, and adopter type. The results showed a fit effect that approached significance among lax adopters on intention to reduce in-person socializing (b = 1.36, 95% CI [−0.25, 2.97], p = .097) but not on the other two social distancing measures we had also used in Experiment 1. In other words, pairing “stay healthy” messages with concern for the individual and pairing “keep safe” messages with concern for Americans.

Compared with participants who provided data nine days earlier, those in Experiment 2 perceived themselves and the United States as being more vulnerable to COVID-19 (p < .001 in both cases). Also, a higher percentage of a publication of the behavioral science & policy association.

increased intentions to reduce in-person socializing among current lax adopters of stay-at-home guidance. (Find detailed results on these three measures in Tables S20–S25 in the Supplemental Material.)

We found that, compared with the lax adopters (who planned to make an average of 15.04 trips), strong adopters planned to make fewer trips (9.93 on average). Relative to strong adopters, lax adopters were significantly more influenced to stay home by messaging in which the “stay healthy” or “keep safe” frame fit with the highlighting of individual or American identity, respectively (b = 9.39, 95% CI [3.91, 14.86], p = .001). Specifically, the predicted fit effect of frame and identity was significant among lax adopters (b = −8.90, 95% CI [−13.95, −3.85], p = .001) but not among strong adopters (b = 0.48, 95% CI [−1.63, 2.60], p = .654).

Next, we examined how different combinations of frame, identity, and adopter type might predict social distancing intention as assessed.

For lax adopters, we found that when their individual identity was made salient, the health-promotion messaging led to fewer planned trips than the prevention-focused messaging did; the mean planned-trips score was 11.91 for those who read the promotion-oriented headline and 17.33 for those who read the prevention-oriented headline (d = 0.53, p = .005; see Figure 2). In contrast, when their American identity was made salient to the lax adopters, it was the prevention-focused messaging that led to fewer planned trips; the mean planned-trips score was 17.07 for those who read the promotion-oriented headline and 13.59 for those who read the prevention-oriented headline (d = 0.34, p = .044). Put another way, when the messaging focused on staying healthy, lax adopters whose individual identity was made salient planned to leave home fewer times than did those whose American identity was made salient (d = 0.55, p = .004), whereas when the messaging focused on staying safe, lax adopters whose American identity was made salient planned to leave home fewer times than did those whose individual identity was made salient (d = 0.34, p = .043). These results held for each non-work-related reason (see Tables S27–S38 in the Supplemental Material).

Note. The matching of a “keep safe” messaging frame with an emphasis on recipients’ identity as an American and the matching of a “stay healthy” messaging frame with an emphasis on recipients’ identity as an individual led recipients who were lax adopters of social distancing measures to plan fewer trips outside the home. Matching frame and identity had no significant effect on strong adopters who were already staying home more. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

30 behavioral science & policy | volume 6 issue 2 2020

# Figure 3. Mean social distancing intention as a function of frame, identity, & adopter type (Experiment 1)

| |Self|Community|America|
|---|---|---|---|
|11|7.78|7.89|8.28|
| |8.28|7.97|7.45|
| |9.50|9.45|9.61|
| |9.68|9.77|9.62|

Note. For lax adopters of social distancing guidance, pairing a “keep safe” messaging frame with an emphasis on recipients’ identity as Americans (“Here’s what you can do to keep America safe”) led to greater intention to practice social distancing than did pairing this frame with an emphasis on the individual (“Here’s what you can do to keep you safe”) or on being a part of a community (“Here’s what you can do to keep your community safe”). A “stay healthy” messaging frame was most effective when paired with an emphasis on the self (“Here’s what you can do to help you stay healthy”) or the community (“Here’s what you can do to help your community stay healthy”). These effects were not significant for strong adopters, who were already staying home more. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

In line with the findings of Experiment 2, the analysis revealed a significant regulatory fit effect of frame and identity on social distancing for lax adopters (b = 1.33, 95% CI [0.50, 2.15], p = .002) but not for strong adopters (b = 0.17, 95% CI [−0.33, 0.67], p = .504; see Figure 3 and the Supplemental Material for fuller details).

In the data collected for Experiment 2, political party affiliation no longer predicted perceived vulnerability to COVID-19 (see Table S18 in the Supplemental Material), although more Democrats (90.0%) than Republicans or others (79.5% and 82.6%, respectively) still reported that they were “for sure” staying home more than they did before the pandemic (p < .001; see Table S19 in the Supplemental Material). As in Experiment 1, political party affiliation did not moderate the fit effect among lax adopters (p > .26).

Conclusions

In two survey-based experiments, we examined the regulatory fit effect on people’s intention to adopt social distancing recommendations for a publication of the behavioral science & policy association.

effect on intentions to engage in all three social distancing actions. We later categorized participants in Experiment 1 according to whether they were lax or strong adopters of social distancing and found that messaging that incorporated regulatory fit increased intentions to practice social distancing only among the lax adopters. The strong adopters were already vigilantly practicing social distancing and did not need more persuasion.

Experiment 2 was conducted on March 27, 2020, when 21 states were under stay-at-home orders and a greater percentage of participants reported being adherent to them. When we used the same outcome measures as we applied in Experiment 1, we did not replicate the regulatory fit findings, potentially because the measures were not sensitive enough to capture the fit effect when many participants were already practicing social distancing. But we did observe a significant regulatory fit effect on an additional measure of social distancing intentions: the number of out-of-home trips participants planned to make in the next seven days for each of six reasons unrelated to work. The fit effect was observed among the lax adopters but not among the strong adopters. Strong adopters, who already planned to make fewer trips than the lax adopters did, probably did not have much room to improve.

Our findings have an important implication for policymakers: messages that highlight a match between recipients’ identity as an individual and a health-promotion goal or a match between recipients’ group identity (for example, as Americans) and a disease-prevention goal can be effective at encouraging the adoption of COVID-19-related social distancing practices. Policymakers should leverage the regulatory fit effect in framing policies and persuasive communications designed to promote social distancing; more specifically, they should pair “stay healthy” messages with an emphasis on benefits to the recipients themselves but pair “keep safe” messages with an emphasis on protecting the broader public. We anticipate that the fit effect could also apply to other precautionary behaviors that we did not examine, such as wearing face masks or getting vaccinated.

A. Survey materials, data, and code are available at OSF (https://osf.io/h38nm/). We preregistered our primary plan of examining people’s perceptions of the pandemic and the effect of regulatory fit on adoption of precautionary measures for Experiment 1 at https://osf.io/kanj8/ and Experiment 2 at https://aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=zy2mw7.

B. Editors’ note to nonscientists: For any given data set, the statistical test used—such as the chi-square (χ²), the t test, or the F test—depends on the number of data points and the kinds of variables being considered, such as proportions or means. F tests and t tests are parametric: they make some assumptions about the characteristics of a population, such as that the compared groups have an equal variance on a compared factor. In cases where these assumptions are violated, researchers make some adjustments in their calculations to take into account dissimilar variances across groups. A b value indicates how much a change in one variable accounts for a change in another variable. The p value of a statistical test is the probability of obtaining a result equal to or more extreme than would be observed merely by chance, assuming there are no true differences between the groups under study (this assumption is referred to as the null hypothesis). Researchers traditionally view p < .05 as the threshold of statistical significance, with lower values indicating a stronger basis for rejecting the null hypothesis. In addition to the chance question, researchers consider the size of the observed effects, using such measures as Cohen’s d or Cohen’s h. Cohen’s d or h values of 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 typically indicate small, medium, and large effect sizes, respectively. Standard deviation is a measure of the amount of variation in a set of values. Approximately two-thirds of the observations fall between one standard deviation below the mean and one standard deviation above the mean. Standard error uses standard deviation to determine how precisely one has estimated a true population value from a sample. For instance, if one took enough samples from a population, the sample mean ±1 standard error would contain the true population mean around two-thirds of the time. A 95% confidence interval for a given metric indicates that in 95% of random samples from a given population, the measured value will fall within the stated interval.

author affiliation

Wang & Lee: Northwestern University. Corresponding author’s e-mail: jiaqian.wang@kellogg.northwestern.edu.

a publication of the behavioral science & policy association

supplemental material

- https://behavioralpolicy.org/publications/
- Methods & Analysis

33

# References

1. Office of the Governor Doug Ducey. (2020, March 30). “Stay home, stay healthy, stay connected” [Press release]. https://azgovernor.gov/governor/news/2020/03/new-executive-order-stay-home-stay-healthy-stay-connected
2. Office of the Governor. (2020, March 26). Gov. Beshear urges Kentuckians to stay healthy at home [Press release]. https://kentucky.gov/Pages/Activity-stream.aspx?n=GovernorBeshear&prId=105
3. Office of Governor Pete Ricketts. (2020, April 6). Gov. Ricketts urges Nebraskans to stay home, stay healthy, and stay connected [Press release]. https://governor.nebraska.gov/press/gov-ricketts-urges-nebraskans-stay-home-stay-healthy-and-stay-connected
4. Inslee, J. (2020, March 24). “Stay home, stay healthy” [Transcript]. https://www.governor.wa.gov/news-media/stay-home-stay-healthy-address-transcript
5. Office of Governor Ned Lamont. (2020, March 20). Governor Lamont signs executive order asking Connecticut businesses and residents: ‘Stay safe, stay home’ [Press release]. https://portal.ct.gov/Office-of-the-Governor/News/Press-Releases/2020/03-2020/Governor-Lamont-Signs-Executive-Order-Asking-Connecticut-Businesses-and-Residents-Stay-Safe
6. Michigan.gov. (2020, March 23). Governor Whitmer signs “stay home, stay safe” executive order [Press release]. https://www.michigan.gov/coronavirus/0,9753,7-406-98159-522625--,00.html
7. Herbert, G. (2020, March 27). Full text: Governor’s “stay home, stay safe” directive. https://coronavirus.utah.gov/full-text-governors-stay-home-stay-safe-directive/
8. Office of Governor Phil Scott. (2020, March 24). Governor Phil Scott issues a “stay home, stay safe” order, directs additional closures [Press release]. https://governor.vermont.gov/press-release/governor-phil-scott-issues-%E2%80%9Cstay-home-stay-safe%E2%80%9D-order-directs-additional-closures
9. Higgins, E. T., Idson, L. C., Freitas, A. L., Spiegel, S., & Molden, D. C. (2003). Transfer of value from fit. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1140–1153. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.6.1140
10. Lee, A. Y., & Aaker, J. L. (2004). Bringing the frame into focus: The influence of regulatory fit on processing fluency and persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 205–218. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.86.2.205
11. Lee, A. Y., Aaker, J. L., & Gardner, W. L. (2000). The pleasures and pains of distinct self-construals: The role of interdependence in regulatory focus. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 1122–1134. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.78.6.1122
12. Aaker, J. L., & Lee, A. Y. (2001). “I” seek pleasures and “we” avoid pains: The role of self-regulatory goals in information processing and persuasion. Journal of Consumer Research, 28, 33–49. https://doi.org/10.1086/321946
13. Hong, J., & Lee, A. Y. (2008). Be fit and be strong: Mastering self-regulation through regulatory fit. Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 682–695. https://doi.org/10.1086/521902
14. Wang, J., & Lee, A. Y. (2006). The role of regulatory focus in preference construction. Journal of Marketing Research, 43, 28–38. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.43.1.28
15. Litman, L., Robinson, J., & Abberbock, T. (2017). TurkPrime.com: A versatile crowdsourcing data acquisition platform for the behavioral sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 49, 433–442. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-016-0727-z
16. Dong, E., Du, H., & Gardner, L. (2020). An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20, 533–534. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30120-1
17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020, November 17). Social distancing. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html

