# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

# Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Energy Economics

# Raising the AC temperature in the tropics, one degree at a time

Jeeva Somasundarama, Ingrid Kochb, Noah Limc,*

a IE Business School, María de Molina, 31 Bis, 28006 Madrid, Spain

b The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 300 Kenan Center Drive, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States of America

c NUS Global Asia Institute, S17, #03-01, 10 Lower Kent Ridge Road, 119076, Singapore

# A R T I C L E  I N F O

# A B S T R A C T

Keywords: AC temperature, Gradual targets, Incentives, Energy conservation

In tropical countries, air conditioners (ACs) account for a significant fraction of energy consumption. We conduct a randomized control trial to examine how people can best be induced to raise their AC temperature by 2 °C over time, to reduce energy consumption. Subjects were randomly assigned to (1) raise the AC temperature gradually, by 1 °C in period 1 and an additional 1 °C in period 2; (2) increase the temperature by 2 °C in one go during period 2; or (3) a no-incentive control condition. We find that raising AC temperatures gradually worked better in achieving higher AC temperatures during the intervention and post-intervention periods. Energy consumption data confirmed that these higher AC temperatures translated into energy savings. Our findings demonstrate the effectiveness of gradual targets to initiate and sustain behavioral change in energy conservation and other related domains.

# 1. Introduction

In particular, our paper employs a three-arm randomized control trial (RCT) that compares two incentive schedules, both with an ultimate target of encouraging people to raise their AC temperatures by 2 °C. We introduce monetary incentives along with temperature targets either gradually (GT) or abruptly (AT), along with a control condition (CC). Our unique institutional context, which will be described in more detail below, coupled with the use of temperature sensors, allows us to track subjects’ AC temperatures accurately and attribute any observed behavioral change to the effect of the given incentives on the individual participant.

We first measured all subjects’ AC temperatures over a 7-day baseline period and obtained each subject’s lowest AC temperature recorded over this period. We call this temperature the baseline minimum. After this, we randomized subjects into one of the three arms in the RCT.

Subjects in the control condition (CC) were given neither AC temperature targets nor daily monetary incentives throughout the study. Subjects in the gradual treatment (GT) were incentivized to increase the AC temperature across two periods. In period 1, they were given $1 each day their daily minimum temperature (DMT), which is the lowest temperature recorded in a given day, was 1 °C higher than their baseline minimum. In period 2, they received $2 each day their DMT was 2 °C higher than their baseline minimum. This brought the total increase to 2 °C relative to their baseline temperature, albeit in a gradual manner over the two periods.

* Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: jeeva.somasundaram@ie.edu (J. Somasundaram), Ingrid_Koch@kenan-flagler.unc.edu (I. Koch), noahlim@nus.edu.sg (N. Lim).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2023.107191

Received 15 March 2023; Received in revised form 2 November 2023; Accepted 10 November 2023; Available online 17 November 2023

0140-9883/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

# J. Somasundaram et al.

In the abrupt treatment (AT), subjects were incentivized to increase the AC temperature only in period 2. In period 1, they were given neither a temperature target nor a monetary incentive. In period 2, they received $2 each day their DMT was 2 °C higher than their baseline minimum. This was identical to the intervention given to GT subjects in period 2.

The rationale for comparing GT versus AT is as follows: If participants can be financially incentivized to abruptly raise their AC temperature by 2 °C over a relatively short period, then policymakers can simply induce people to do so. However, two parallel theories suggest that asking people to increase AC temperatures gradually would be more effective, despite a longer intervention duration.

Based on the literature on heat exposure, GT participants would have been more acclimatized to a higher temperature compared to AT subjects at the end of period 1, so the acclimation to the 2 °C target increase in period 2 would be relatively easier (Hanna and Tait, 2015; Periard et al., 2015). As such, in period 2, subjects who have been exposed regularly to a 1 °C increase in AC temperature should feel less thermal discomfort with the 2 °C increase from baseline, compared to subjects who had not acclimatized to a higher temperature before. This heat acclimation perspective leads to the same prediction as habit formation theory (Pollak, 1970; Becker and Murphy, 1988; Becker, 1992), which is that once people initiate a behavioral change, the marginal cost of improving on that behavior becomes lower. In our context, given that GT subjects have already adjusted AC temperatures to a little higher than usual, another small increase to reach the ultimate target is less painful than if they were asked to reach that same target immediately. Hence, both theories suggest that GT participants should achieve higher AC temperatures in period 2 and in the post-intervention, compared to CC and AT subjects.

Past research has demonstrated that financial incentives can motivate people to shift energy demand to off-peak hours or lower overall household energy usage (McClelland and Cook, 1980; Bradley et al., 2016; Faruqui and Sergici, 2010; Joskow and Wolfram, 2012; Ito, 2014; Ito et al., 2018). Beyond monetary incentives, research has shown that social comparisons, energy conservation goals, feedback on energy consumption, and information on pricing and externalities can also encourage energy conservation behavior (Ito et al., 2018; Jessoe and Rapson, 2014; Allcott and Rogers, 2014; Allcott, 2011; Brülisauer et al., 2020; Tiefenbeck et al., 2018; Asensio and Delmas, 2015; McCalley and Midden, 2002). However, most existing studies focus on incentivizing subjects to reduce total energy consumption. Given that it is difficult for subjects to know the amount that each of their appliances contribute to their total energy consumption, appliance-specific energy usage goals and incentives could tap new energy savings (Brülisauer et al., 2020; Tiefenbeck et al., 2018). Here we focus exclusively on AC usage, which contributes a significant and growing amount to worldwide energy consumption and global warming (Peters et al., 2013).

Our aim is to drive a reduction in AC energy consumption by incentivizing subjects to increase their AC temperature. Raising AC temperatures is a promising way to reduce energy consumption because subjects can easily track and change their AC temperature in real time using their thermostat. While some existing studies did include setting a higher AC temperature in the energy-saving tips provided to participants (Allcott and Rogers, 2014; Brülisauer et al., 2020), subjects’ room temperatures were not measured. One exception is Brown et al., who focus on reducing energy usage in an office environment (Brown et al., 2013). However, the authors are interested in reducing energy usage from heating by lowering the default thermostat temperature in cold climates. Further, unlike Brown et al., our study aims to raise AC temperatures of subjects by providing explicit AC temperature targets and financial incentives. In addition, we are also able to quantify the effect of raising AC temperatures on kWh energy consumption.

Finally, we contribute to the literature on behavioral change (Charness and Gneezy, 2009; Volpp et al., 2008; Volpp et al., 2009; Acland and Levy, 2015; Loewenstein et al., 2016). Since raising AC temperatures can lead to energy savings, it is important to determine the best way to achieve this goal. This paper uses an RCT to examine if reaching a 2 °C AC temperature increase is best achieved by asking people to increase temperatures gradually, albeit over a longer period, or to raise temperatures immediately. We are not aware of any work in the energy conservation and related domains that has examined the role of such gradual versus abrupt behavioral targets.

# 2. Empirical setting and study design

# 2.1. Empirical setting

A total of 191 students at the National University of Singapore (NUS) participated in our study. All subjects resided in one of three residential dormitories on campus; the three dormitories were all located within a 500-m radius. Each subject lived alone in a single dorm room with its own AC unit. The AC unit comes with a remote control, which was used to turn the AC on or off, or to adjust the AC temperature (in 0.1 °C intervals). Since subjects did not have any roommates, they were the only people who controlled their AC unit. We installed a temperature sensor in each room to measure the temperature every 10 min in 0.1 °C intervals (Supplementary Fig. 1). Daily minimum temperature (DMT), captured by the sensor, was our main dependent variable and formed the basis for the temperature targets in GT and AT. The DMT corresponds to the lowest temperature recorded in a subject’s room on any given day. On the days when the AC was switched on, the air temperatures in the small dorm rooms (&lt;10 square meters) converge to the AC temperature set within minutes, and so the DMT corresponds to the lowest AC temperature set that day. See ‘Explanation of our chosen temperature measures’ in the supplementary materials for additional details.

Per university’s policy, each subject pre-purchased AC credits to use the AC, at a rate of $0.25 for each hour of AC usage. Credits could be added at any time through a website or by visiting a terminal within the dormitory compound. The university charges students only for the duration of AC usage and not the AC temperature set. Therefore, besides the financial incentives provided in GT and AT, there was no other economic motive for subjects to increase the AC temperature. Outside of AC credits, participants did not pay for electricity or other utilities in their dorm rooms.

# 2.2. Experimental design and procedure

The experimental design is described in Fig. 1. The study was divided into four periods: (1) baseline period, (2) intervention period 1, (3) intervention period 2, and (4) the post-intervention period.

Before the start of the study, we visited each subject’s room to distribute the baseline period instructions and install the temperature sensor. At this time, we also asked all subjects to fill out a survey detailing their baseline AC use. Results of the survey are shown in Supplementary Table 6, with findings indicating that AC use before the intervention began was very similar across subjects in all experimental conditions. During the baseline period (first seven days of the study), all subjects.

1 The sensors used were Rotronic HL-1D sensors with an accuracy of +/- 0.3 °C. All sensors were placed on top of the subjects’ dorm issued armoires, which were all situated in the same place in the rooms and were out of the direct airflow of the AC unit. We taped the sensors down, being careful not to obstruct any vital temperature measurement parts of the sensors, to ensure they would not move during the duration of the study. Subjects were also instructed not to touch the sensors during the study. We tested the sensors’ sensitivity to changes in AC temperature and found they adjusted to temperature changes accurately within a few minutes. Periodic checks of the sensors confirmed their functioning and reliability throughout the study duration.

2 Scripts of all instructions can be found in the supplementary materials.

# J. Somasundaram et al.

# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

# Conditions

|Min Temp in Baseline (Mini)|Target = Mini + 2°C| | |No target|GT|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Mini + 1°C|Target = Mini + 1°C|Incentive = $2/day| | | |
|Min Temp in Baseline (Mini)|No target|No target|Target = Mini + 2°C|No target|AT| |
|Incentive = $2/day| | | | | |

Baseline (7 days) Period 1 (23 days) Period 2 (23 days) Post-Treatment (25 days)

Fig. 1. Experimental conditions, temperature targets and monetary incentives. Subscript “i” (e.g., Mini) denotes a subject.

were given neither a temperature target nor a financial incentive. We obtained each subject’s single lowest temperature setting, as recorded by the sensor, during all the days when the AC was on during the 7-day baseline period. This temperature formed the baseline minimum. See ‘Explanation of our chosen temperature measures’ in the supplementary materials for additional details on why we incentivized the subjects to increase their AC temperature relative to their baseline minimum. The minima did not vary across the three conditions (see Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 2).

At the end of the baseline period, we visited all subjects’ rooms within a span of two consecutive days to obtain the baseline minimum temperature from the sensor (specified in 0.1 °C intervals) and explain the instructions for period 1. Subjects were asked whether they had turned on the AC at least once during the baseline period. Five of the 191 subjects did not switch on their ACs during the baseline period and so were excluded from the study. The remaining 186 subjects were each randomly assigned to the GT, AT or CC condition. Subjects in all conditions were given a handout discussing the benefits of increasing the AC temperature (see ‘Handout on the importance of energy conservation’ in the supplementary materials). Subject randomization and attrition are shown in Supplementary Fig. 3.

There were 47 subjects in CC, 74 subjects in GT, and 65 subjects in AT. The targets and incentives used during the intervention and post-intervention periods are described in Fig. 1. Note that periods 1 and 2 were each 23 days long, which, based on the literature, is enough time for people to acclimate to a higher temperature (Robinson et al., 1943; Flouris et al., 2014; Periard et al., 2021).

At the end of the post-intervention period, we visited the subjects’ rooms to collect the temperature sensors and disburse a $60 fixed payment to all subjects for participating. We explained to subjects in GT and AT that they could collect their incentive payments two weeks later, after we confirmed whether they met their temperature targets for each day and tallied the individual earnings. The experiment was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at NUS, and we obtained written informed consent from all participants. See Supplementary Fig. 4 for a.

3 The randomization was done in the following manner. We had a total of 100 balls. Out of these, 25 balls were assigned to CC. The remaining 75 balls were split between the two treatments: GT (38 balls) and AT (37 balls). Since we had a limited number of subjects, we designed the study to collect more data from the treatment conditions so that we could better detect differences between the GT and AT treatments across various periods. For each of the 186 subjects, we picked a ball randomly (sampling with replacement) and the subject was assigned to the corresponding condition.

5 Upon receiving instructions for the post-intervention period, subjects were given 24 h to complete an online survey where they were asked to confirm that: 1) they had read the instructions in full, 2) they understood there were no temperature targets or incentives during the post-intervention period, and 3) they should contact a member of the research team immediately if they had any questions or needed clarification. If subjects did not complete the survey within 24 h, a member of the research team contacted them to ensure that they did so promptly.

# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

# 3. Results

Before testing the hypotheses using regression analyses, we describe the summary statistics and key empirical patterns.

# 3.1. AC switch-on rate

We first checked for differences in the daily AC switch-on rate, which records whether a subject switched on the AC at least once on any given day. We focus on this because subjects could increase the DMT in two ways: 1) switch off the AC or 2) increase the AC temperature. We observe no differences in the AC switch-on rate across conditions in each of the four periods (see Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 2). This suggests that if there are temperature differences across conditions, they are not attributable to differences in AC switch-on rates.

# 3.2. Average DMT across conditions

Fig. 3a compares the average DMT between GT and CC, and Fig. 3b compares the average DMT between GT and AT (see Table 2 for the 95% confidence intervals), whenever the AC is turned on. There are no significant differences in the baseline period DMTs across conditions.

Fig. 3a-b show that DMT was generally higher in GT than in CC and AT in periods 1, 2 and the post-intervention period. In period 1, average DMT in GT was 25.80 °C, which is higher than AT (25.37 °C) and CC (25.36 °C). This suggests the incentives are effective in nudging subjects to increase their AC temperatures. In period 2, average DMT in GT was 26.43 °C, which is again higher than AT (26.19 °C) and CC (25.75 °C). This supports the hypothesis that gradual targets are more effective than abrupt targets. In the post-intervention period, a higher average DMT in GT (26.18 °C) was maintained compared to AT (25.94 °C) and CC (25.58 °C).

# 2.4. Hypotheses

This study aims to test three hypotheses:

1. In period 1, DMT will be higher in GT than in CC and AT.
2. In period 2, DMT will be higher in GT than in AT, even though both treatments had identical targets and incentives.

|Baseline Avg:|Period 1 Avg:|Period 2 Avg:|Post-intervention Avg:|
|---|---|---|---|
|GT = 0.69|GT = 0.57|GT = 0.61|GT = 0.58|
|AT = 0.65|AT = 0.60|AT = 0.60|AT = 0.58|
|CC = 0.62|CC = 0.58|CC = 0.67|CC = 0.58|

Fig. 2. Daily AC switch-on rate. The AC switch-on rate averages around 60% because subjects were primarily Singaporeans, who usually return home during weekends. The troughs in the figure correspond to the weekends. Standard error bars are shown.

# J. Somasundaram et al.

# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

# 3.3. Distribution of change in temperature for each subject across conditions

(25.78 ◦C). The effect size (Cohen’s d) calculations for the between condition temperature differences are reported in Supplementary Table 3.

These plots also reveal the proportion of subjects that achieved the +1 ◦C target (in period 1) and the +2 ◦C target (in period 2).

In period 1 (Fig. 4b), the CDF for GT consistently lies below the CDFs for AT and CC. This suggests that a higher proportion of subjects in GT raised the AC temperature by 1 ◦C compared to AT and CC. In period 2 (Fig. 4c), the CDF for GT mostly lies below that of AT, even though both conditions had the same temperature target (+2 ◦C) and the same incentive ($2 per day when target was met). This is consistent with our hypothesis and shows that a greater proportion of subjects in GT increased the AC temperature by 2 ◦C, compared to AT. The same pattern persists during the post-intervention period (Fig. 4d).

Fig. 3. a-b Average DMT when the AC is on in each condition across subjects. Standard error bars are shown.

| | |GT|CC| | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |20|40|60|80| |
| | |8|3|3|8|
| | |GT|AT| | |
| |20|40|60|80| |
| | |8|3|3|8|

# J. Somasundaram et al.

# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

|Baseline Avg:|2 Avg: Increase in|
|---|---|
|J₈ GT = 25.06|J³ Period 1|
|AT = 25.05|GT = 1.55|
|CC = 25.14|AT = 1.00|
| |CC = 0.94|

|L₈| |L₃|
|---|---|---|
|8⁸ GT|3³ GT| |
|AT|AT| |
|CC|CC| |

(a) Avg: DMT in the baseline period when the AC is switched on:

(b) Avg: temperature increase from the baseline minimum in period 1 when the AC is switched on:

|J|Avg: Increase in|
|---|---|
|3 Period 2|GT = 2.19|
|8 AT = 1.82|5 AT = 1.57|
|L 3 CC = 1.33|L₃ CC = 1.36|

(c) Avg: temperature increase from the baseline minimum in period 2 when the AC is switched on.

(d) Avg: temperature increase from the baseline minimum in the post-intervention period when the AC is switched on.

Fig. 4. a-d CDFs. a. DMT in the baseline period when the AC is switched on. b. Increase from baseline minimum in period 1 when the AC is switched on. c. Increase from baseline minimum in period 2 when the AC is switched on. d. Increase from baseline minimum in the post-intervention period when the AC is switched on.

# 3.4. Regression analysis

We now formally test the hypotheses using ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions. We exploit the panel structure of our data by regressing subjects’ DMTs on 1) the treatment variables (GT is the base category and AT and CC are dummy variables); 2) temporal dynamics (daily outside temperature, AC credits purchased up to day t-1); and 3) the control variables which capture subject-specific, time-invariant fixed effects (dormitory, gender, baseline AC energy consumption, baseline minimum temperature).

Our rationale for including the control variables is as follows. First, the average daily temperature in Singapore was consistently between 27.0 ◦C and 30.0 ◦C during the RCT, fluctuations in the outside temperature may affect the temperature inside the subjects’ rooms, and in turn the AC temperatures they choose to set. Second, we control for AC credits purchased up to day t-1 as it influences how long the subject can switch the AC on, on day t, which could affect how cool the subject’s room was. Third, while all three dorms are close in geographical proximity, differences in building layout and sun exposure may affect temperatures inside each dorm, and so we control for which dorm the subject resides in. Next, there is some research that suggests that gender may play a role in sensitivity to temperatures (Kingma and van Marken Lichtenbelt, 2015; Karjalainen, 2007; Beshir and Ramsey, 1981), so we control for participant gender. We also include baseline AC energy consumption to account for pre-intervention individual differences in the duration and preference of AC usage.

Most importantly, we control for participant gender. We also include baseline AC energy consumption to account for pre-intervention individual differences in the duration and preference of AC usage. The regression estimates are presented period-by-period in Table 1, with Supplementary Tables 4 and 5 showing the replicated results with limited and no control variables. A summary of the regression adjusted DMTs along with their 95% confidence intervals is shown in Table 2. In period 1, GT subjects had DMTs 0.483 ◦C and 0.453 ◦C higher than those of AT and CC subjects, respectively (both p’s = 0.000). Hence the financial incentive for attaining the 1 ◦C target in GT was effective in raising AC temperatures. In period 2, GT subjects had DMTs 0.732 ◦C higher than CC (p = 0.000) and, more importantly, 0.335 ◦C higher than AT (p = 0.035). Since GT and AT subjects were given identical targets and incentives in period 2, this higher temperature in GT suggests that gradual targets may make it easier for people to adapt to temperature increases. This is consistent with our hypothesis. In the post-intervention period, GT subjects maintained a DMT 0.406 ◦C higher than CC (p = 0.006) and 0.308 ◦C higher than AT (p = 0.041). Despite DMTs in AT being higher than those in CC in period 2 (p = 0.028), AT subjects did

# J. Somasundaram et al.

# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

# Table 1

OLS estimation showing treatment effect by period.

|Dependent variable= Daily minimum temperature (◦C)|Period 1|Period 2|Post-intervention period|
|---|---|---|---|
|CC|0.453*** (0.113)|0.732*** (0.159)|0.406** (0.146)|
|AT|0.483*** (0.105)|0.335* (0.158)|0.308* (0.150)|
|Dorm 2|0.264*** (0.073)|0.172 (0.124)|0.160 (0.107)|
|Dorm 3|0.199 (0.105)|0.292* (0.144)|0.335* (0.136)|
|Male|0.173* (0.069)|0.092 (0.106)|0.071 (0.092)|
|Baseline Min. (◦C)|0.350*** (0.047)|0.307*** (0.062)|0.228*** (0.047)|
|Outside temperature (◦C) on day t|0.589*** (0.038)|0.461*** (0.037)|0.573*** (0.054)|
|Baseline energy consumption (kWh)|0.248*** (0.073)|0.428*** (0.118)|0.226 (0.155)|
|AC credits purchased until day t-1|0.002 (0.002)|0.005* (0.002)|0.007* (0.003)|
|AC off|1.153*** (0.097)|1.002*** (0.112)|1.463*** (0.128)|
|CC X AC off|0.298 (0.157)|0.696*** (0.206)|0.410* (0.193)|
|AT X AC off|0.394** (0.145)|0.518*** (0.175)|0.142 (0.185)|
|Constant|25.818*** (0.085)|26.550*** (0.127)|26.273*** (0.127)|
|Observations|4278|4278|4573|
|R²|0.504|0.431|0.459|
|Adjusted R²|0.503|0.429|0.458|
|Residual Std. Error|0.946 (df = 4265)|1.194 (df = 4265)|1.176 (df = 4560)|
|F Statistic|361.745*** (df = 12; 4265)|268.921*** (df = 12; 4265)|322.850*** (df = 12; 4560)|

# Table 2

Daily minimum AC temperature (◦C) when AC is switched on (mean and 95% confidence interval) by condition.

|Condition|Baseline Period|Period 1|Period 2|
|---|---|---|---|
|CC|Mean DMT (◦C), Unadjusted|25.14|25.36|
|GT|Mean DMT (◦C), Unadjusted|25.06|25.80*,††|
|AT|Mean DMT (◦C), Unadjusted|25.05|25.37††|
|CC|Mean DMT (◦C), Regression-adjusted|25.24|25.43|
|GT|Mean DMT (◦C), Regression-adjusted|25.21|25.89***,†††|
|AT|Mean DMT (◦C), Regression-adjusted|25.15|25.40†††|

We indicate whether CC differs from each treatment condition (AT and GT) using *, **, *** to represent p< 0.05, p< 0.01, and p < 0.005, respectively, for each treatment condition’s comparison with CC. We indicate whether the treatment conditions (AT and GT) differ from one another using †, ††, ††† to represent p < 0.05, p < 0.01, and p < 0.005, respectively, for each treatment condition’s comparison with the other treatment (AT or GT).

# 3.5. Analysis of energy consumption data

While we show that GT led to higher AC temperatures, it is also useful to confirm if this translated into lower energy consumption. To evaluate this, we used data on the subjects’ daily AC energy consumption (in kWh) from the power company. Recall that, because subjects pay only for the duration of AC use via the advanced purchase of AC credits at $0.25 per hour of use, there are no additional monetary savings in the form of lower energy bills if they raise their AC temperatures. However, because actual AC energy consumption is a function of both the duration of AC use (primary component) and the AC temperature set.

Note that, an alternative approach is to use the Heckman selection model, which accounts for the possibility that subjects’ DMTs are related to their AC switch-on decisions. The Heckman model results are qualitatively similar to the OLS findings (see ‘Robustness check: Heckman selection model’ in the supplementary materials).

# 4. Discussion

To address climate change, policymakers are encouraging investments in green technologies and the adoption of environmentally friendly behaviors (Gillingham et al., 2006; Sorrell, 2015; European Commission, 2019; Sovacool, 2014). In countries with tropical climates, one continuing challenge is the increase in AC usage as household incomes rise, leading to greater energy consumption. Since most electricity in these countries is generated by fossil fuels (World Bank, 2019), CO2 emissions will increase. Therefore, raising the AC temperature by as little as 2 ◦C can help reduce energy consumption and CO2 emissions.

# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

# Table 3

OLS estimation showing effect of treatment on AC energy consumption by period.

|Dependent variable = Daily energy consumption (kWh) | AC turned on|Period 1|Period 2|
|---|---|---|
|CC|0.031***|0.027*|
| |(0.011)|(0.010)|
|AT|0.024**|0.030***|
| |(0.009)|(0.008)|
|Dorm 2|0.014|0.004|
| |(0.008)|(0.008)|
|Dorm 3|0.017|0.009|
| |(0.011)|(0.016)|
|Male|0.007|0.010|
| |(0.008)|(0.008)|
|Outside temperature (°C) on day t|0.018***|0.011*|
| |(0.004)|(0.005)|
|Baseline energy consumption (kWh)|0.129***|0.111***|
| |(0.006)|(0.008)|
|AC credits purchased until day t-1|0.0004|0.001***|
| |(0.0002)|(0.0001)|
|Constant|0.107***|0.120***|
| |(0.008)|(0.009)|
|Observations|2052|2298|
|R²|0.412|0.366|
|Adjusted R²|0.409|0.364|
|Residual Std. Error|0.106|0.110|
| |(df = 2043)|(df = 2289)|
|F Statistic|178.770***|165.383***|
| |(df = 8; 2043)|(df = 8; 2289)|

Standard errors (clustered at the subject-level) are shown in parentheses. Reference categories are GT, dorm 1 and female subject. Daily outside temperature, baseline minimum temperature, baseline AC energy consumption, and credits purchased until day t-1 are mean-centered. There is no difference in energy consumption between conditions in the baseline period.

* p <0.05.

** p< 0.01.

*** p < 0.005.

We incentivized subjects to increase their AC temperatures 2 °C above status quo, via gradual versus abrupt temperature targets over two periods. In period 2, GT subjects were more successful than AT subjects in raising and maintaining higher AC temperatures, even though both conditions had identical temperature targets and financial incentives. The higher AC temperatures in GT led to lower energy consumption. In the post-intervention period, the GT subjects continued to maintain a higher AC temperature than CC subjects. On the other hand, AT subjects did not maintain a higher AC temperature than those in CC. Therefore, gradual targets are more effective for driving sustained behavioral change.

We demonstrate that increasing AC temperatures can be a promising way to achieve energy savings, especially in tropical climates. We find that AC temperature is amenable to behavioral change, and policymakers can use monetary incentives to nudge subjects to adapt to a higher AC temperature. Our findings may carry broader implications. For example, coupling financial incentives with gradual targets may also induce behavioral change when encouraging people to lose weight, exercise more, and smoke less.

We conclude with several observations and caveats. First, to accelerate adaptation to a higher temperature, subjects should be used to turning on their ACs regularly. Our results are particularly relevant for tropical climates like that of Singapore where most people use the AC.

We compute WTA using the change in GT subjects’ (AT subjects’) AC temperature and energy consumption from the baseline to period 1 (period 2), compared to the C condition. The WTA compensation for higher AC temperatures is, on average, 0.55 °C per $1, and this translated to an average energy savings of 0.015 kWh per $1.

To check if the treatment effects varied based on the outside temperature, we ran a regression with an interaction between outside temperature and condition. We found that none of the interaction terms were significant.

6 https://www.singstat.gov.sg/find-data/search-by-theme/households/hous

8 See ‘Computation of price elasticity’ in the supplementary materials for details.

9 To check if the treatment effects varied based on the outside temperature, we ran a regression with an interaction between outside temperature and condition. We found that none of the interaction terms were significant.

# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

J. Somasundaram et al.

(Borenstein and Bushnell, 2018). Eighth, the subjects in our study were students who likely have only a modest income from working part-time or through student loans or family transfers. Given this, the $1 and $2 daily monetary payments in the intervention periods seemed to be a large enough financial incentive to induce behavioral change. This might not be the case for those earning a higher income. Relatedly, we cannot rule out the possibility that our study had salience effects that made our subjects more responsive to the daily monetary payments than they might have otherwise been.

Finally, lasting behavioral change is difficult to induce in almost any setting (Wood and Neal, 2016). While our research finds that people who received gradual incentives and targets were able to maintain a higher AC temperature in the post-intervention period than those with abrupt incentives and targets, we cannot definitively say that this difference persisted beyond our study period. Future research should therefore continue to evaluate the long-term effects of inducing environmentally friendly behaviors using financial incentives, especially among diverse demographic groups who have been found to have varying marginal utilities of comfort (Reiss and White, 2005).

# Author contributions

All authors contributed equally to the different stages of the project.

# Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare no competing interests.

# Data availability

The data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.

# Acknowledgements

We thank Teck-Hua Ho for his extensive feedback and support during all stages of the project. We also thank Dmitry Taubinsky and Sharon Ng for their helpful discussion in the project’s early stages. We acknowledge the help rendered by NUS research assistants with the data collection. We also thank the NUS administration for allowing us to conduct the experiment on the campus. We also thanks the Future resilient systems, Singapore ETH centre for the funding support.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2023.107191.

# References

Acland, D., Levy, M.R., 2015. Naivete, projection bias, and habit formation in gym attendance. Manag. Sci. 61, 146–160.

Allcott, H., 2011. Social norms and energy conservation. J. Public Econ. 95, 1082–1095.

Allcott, H., Rogers, T., 2014. The short-run and long-run effects of behavioral interventions: experimental evidence from energy conservation. Am. Econ. Rev. 104, 3003–3037.

Asensio, O.I., Delmas, M.A., 2015. Nonprice incentives and energy conservation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112 (6), E510–E515.

Becker, G.S., 1992. Habits, addictions and traditions. Kyklos 45, 327–345.

Becker, G.S., Murphy, K.M., 1988. A theory of rational addiction. J. Polit. Econ. 96, 675–700.

Beshir, M., Ramsey, J., 1981. Comparison between male and female subjective estimates of thermal effects and sensations. Appl. Ergon. 12 (1), 29–33.

Bloomberg, 2022. Spain Air Conditioning Crackdown Set to Take Effect. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-08-08/spain-air-conditioning-crackdown-set-to-take-effect.

Borenstein, S., Bushnell, J.B., 2018. Do two electricity pricing wrongs make a right? Cost recovery, externalities, and efficiency. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Pol. 14 (4), 80–110.

Bradley, P., Coke, A., Leach, M., 2016. Financial incentive approaches for reducing peak electricity demand, experience from pilot trials with a UK energy provider. Energy Policy 98, 108–120.

Brown, T.C., Gregory, R., 1999. Why the WTA-WTP disparity matters. Ecol. Econ. 28, 323–335.

Brown, Z., Johnstone, N., Haščič, I., Vong, L., Barascud, F., 2013. Testing the effect of defaults on the thermostat settings of OECD employees. Energy Econ. 39, 128–134.

Brülisauer, M., Goette, L., Jiang, Z., Schmitz, J., Schubert, R., 2020. Appliance specific feedback and social comparisons: evidence from a field experiment on electricity saving. Energy Policy 145, 111742.

Charness, G., Gneezy, U., 2009. Incentives to exercise. Econometrica 77, 909–931.

Davis, L.W., Gertler, P.J., 2015. Contribution of air conditioning adoption to future energy use under global warming. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112 (19), 5962–5967.

European Commission, 2019. Energy Efficiency – Targets, Directives and Rules. https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/energy-efficiency/targets-directive-and-rules.

Faruqui, A., Sergici, S., 2010. Household response to dynamic pricing of electricity: a survey of 15 experiments. J. Regul. Econ. 38 (2), 193–225.

Flouris, A., et al., 2014. Changes in heart rate variability during the induction and decay of heat acclimation. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 114, 2119–2128.

Gardner, G.T., Stern, P.C., 2008. The short list: the most effective actions U.S. households can take to curb climate change. Environ. Sci. Policy Sustain. Dev. 50 (5), 12–25.

Gillingham, K., Newell, R., Palmer, K., 2006. Energy efficiency policies: a retrospective examination. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 31, 161–192.

Hanna, E., Tait, P., 2015. Limitations to thermoregulation and acclimatization challenge human adaptation to global warming. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 12, 8034–8074.

International Energy Agency (IEA), 2018. The Future of Cooling: Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Air Conditioning. https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-cooling.

IPCC, 2014. In: Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K., Meyer, L.A. (Eds.), Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, Switzerland.

Ito, K., 2014. Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear electricity pricing. Am. Econ. Rev. 104, 537–563.

Ito, K., Ida, T., Tanaka, M., 2018. The persistence of moral suasion and economic incentives: field experimental evidence from energy demand. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Pol. 10, 240–267.

Jessoe, K., Rapson, D., 2014. Knowledge is (less) power: experimental evidence from residential energy use. Am. Econ. Rev. 104 (4), 1417–1438.

Joskow, P.L., Wolfram, C.D., 2012. Dynamic pricing of electricity. Am. Econ. Rev. 102, 381–385.

Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J.L., Thaler, R.H., 1991. Anomalies: the endowment effect, loss aversion, and status quo bias. J. Econ. Perspect. 5 (1), 193–206.

Karjalainen, S., 2007. Gender differences in thermal comfort and use of thermostats in everyday thermal environments. Build. Environ. 42, 1594–1603.

Kingma, B., van Marken Lichtenbelt, W., 2015. Energy consumption in buildings and female thermal demand. Nat. Clim. Chang. 5, 1054–1056.

Loewenstein, G., Price, J., Volpp, K., 2016. Habit formation in children: evidence from incentives for healthy eating. J. Health Econ. 45, 47–54.

Malik, A., et al., 2022. The potential for indoor fans to change air conditioning use while maintaining human thermal comfort during hot weather: an analysis of energy demand and associated greenhouse gas emissions. Lancet Planet. Health 6 (4), E301–E309.

McCalley, L.T., Midden, C.J.H., 2002. Energy conservation through product-integrated feedback: the roles of goal-setting and social orientation. J. Econ. Psychol. 22, 589–603.

McClelland, L., Cook, S.W., 1980. Promoting energy conservation in master-metered apartments through group financial incentives. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 10 (1), 20–31.

Ministry of the Environment, 2006. Report of this Year’s “COOL BIZ” Achievement. Japan Government. https://www.env.go.jp/en/earth/tm6/061110.html.

National Environmental Agency (NEA), 2017. Household Energy Consumption Study. Singapore Government. https://www.e2singapore.gov.sg/overview/households/saving-energy-at-home/households-studies.

National Environmental Agency (NEA), 2018. NEA’s Go Green Tips. Singapore Government. https://www.cgs.gov.sg/programmes/eco-music-challenge/let’s-go-green/nea’s-go-green-tips.

Periard, J., Racinais, S., Sawka, M., 2015. Adaptations and mechanisms of human heat acclimation: applications for competitive athletes and sports. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 25 (1), 20–38.

Periard, J., Eijsvogels, T., Daanen, H., 2021. Exercise under heat stress: thermoregulation, hydration, performance implications, and mitigation strategies. Physiol. Rev. 101, 1873–1979.

Peters, G., et al., 2013. The challenge to keep global warming below 2 °C. Nat. Clim. Chang. 3, 4–6.

Phoumin, H., Kimura, S., 2014. Analysis on price elasticity of energy demand in East Asia: empirical evidence and policy implications for ASEAN and East Asia. In: ERIA Discussion Paper Series.

Pollak, R.A., 1970. Habit formation and dynamic demand functions. J. Polit. Econ. 78, 745–763.

Press Information Bureau (PIB), 2018. Power Minister Shri RK Singh Launches Campaign to Promote Energy Efficiency in the Area of Air-Conditioning. It will Save Energy and Reduce Greenhouse Gases. India Government. https://pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=180130.

Reiss, P.C., White, M.W., 2005. Household electricity demand, revisited. Rev. Econ. Stud. 72 (3), 853–883.

Robinson, S., Turrell, E., Belding, H., Horvath, S., 1943. Rapid acclimatization to work in hot climates. Am. J. Phys. 140 (2), 168–176.

# Energy Economics 128 (2023) 107191

J. Somasundaram et al.

# References

- Shah, et al., 2015. Benefits of Leapfrogging to Superefficiency and Low Global Warming.
- Volpp, K.G., John, L.K., Troxel, A.B., Norton, L., Fassbender, J., Loewenstein, G., 2008. Financial incentive-based approaches for weight loss: a randomized trial. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 300, 2631–2637.
- Sorrell, S., 2015. Reducing energy demand: a review of issues, challenges and approaches. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 47, 74–82.
- Sovacool, B., 2014. Diversity: energy studies need social science. Nature 511, 529–530.
- Tiefenbeck, V., Goette, L., Degen, K., Tasic, V., Fleisch, E., Lalive, R., Staake, T., 2018. Overcoming salience bias: how real-time feedback fosters resource conservation. Manag. Sci. 64 (3), 1458–1476.
- Wood, W., Neal, D.T., 2016. Healthy through habit: interventions for initiating & maintaining health behavior change. Behav. Sci. Policy 2 (1), 71–83.
- World Bank, 2019. Electricity Production from Oil, Gas and Coal Sources (% of Total). IEA. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.FOSL.ZS?end=2015&start=1997&view=chart.

